All Things Finance & Accounting: Managing Liquidity, Employee Financial Literacy, Capital Allocation, Macroeconomic Uncertainty, and Hiring Your First CFO Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact All Things Finance & Accounting: Managing Liquidity, Employee Financial Literacy, Capital Allocation, Macroeconomic Uncertainty, and Hiring Your First CFO Posted by sdivitkos July 21, 2022 July 21, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: budgetting , cash , customers , financing , hiring , liquidity , management team , pricing , profitability , transparency Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Email My Guest Nicholas Andrews is the Founder of Aspen Consulting Group, a company that performs finance, accounting, and operations consulting for a wide range of small and medium sized businesses. Aspen’s services include technical accounting, corporate finance, valuations, operations planning and M&A due diligence, among others. Prior to founding the Aspen Consulting group, Nick was part of a three-member founding team that grew an asset management business from $0 to $1.5B in AUM across the real estate and energy sectors in less than 4 years. Nick’s 20 years of experience includes establishing finance and accounting operations from non-existent states, as well as managing annual budgets of $200M+ for several publicly-traded entities. Nick received his MBA from UC Berkley, and his BSBA in Accounting & Finance from The University of Denver. Nick is a CPA and resides in Denver, Colorado, with his family. Play The Episode Listen in Your Browser : All Things Finance & Accounting: Managing Cash & Liquidity, Employee Financial Literacy, Capital Allocation, Preparing for Macroeconomic Turbulence, and Hiring Your First CFO – In The Trenches Listen on Other Platforms : Apple | Google | Spotify | Breaker | Pocket Casts | RadioPublic Specific Questions and When They’re Asked Cash and Liquidity Management (3:55) How should CEOs think about how much cash to keep on their Balance sheets at any given time? (7:10) Are there any rules of thumb that might further inform this question? (9:29) How is your answer impacted by the current inflationary environment, where cash on the balance sheet loses value to inflation over time? (12:55) Of all of the levers that CEOs can pull to shore up their liquidity position, which one tends to be most impactful? (16:21) Should CEOs utilize early payment discounts as a tool to manage their liquidity positions? (18:14) What variables should CEOs consider specific to the idea of increasing volumes during liquidity crunches? (21:05) What are some less obvious drains/uses of cash that the average SMB CEO tends to be less frequently aware of? (25:04) What are some tactical practices/exercises that CEOs should regularly engage in that would constitute “good corporate hygiene” with respect to cash management? Employee Financial Literacy (29:28) How much financial information do you think SMB CEOs should be sharing with their entire employee base? Why? (36:43) Are there any metrics that everybody in the company should have a deep understanding of? Why? And what are they? Capital Allocation & Budgeting (38:53) What are some of the more common mistakes you see SMB CEOs making with respect to capital allocation decisions? (42:52) How do you deal with situations where managers claim to be in desperate need of new hires, but those hires aren’t accounted for in the company’s budget for the year? (46:17) For companies who are net-users of cash (i.e. have a burn rate), what metrics would you need to see in order to be comfortable with that fact? (52:22) How should CEOs balance between the discipline and structure that budgets create on one hand, with the flexibility that the “real world” requires on the other? Hiring for the Finance & Accounting Function (58:40) What is the difference between a CFO and, say, a VP or Director of Finance & Accounting? (1:02:07) How does a CEO know whether or not she needs a CFO versus, say, a Controller or a Director of Finance? (1:04:15) What should CEOs look for in the resumes and interviews? And are there any red flags to be aware of that might be suggestive of a potential bad hire? (1:09:42) How do you know that a newly hired Finance/Accounting leader is doing a good job? Are there any metrics that might better inform this question? Conclusion (1:13:58) Given the current macroeconomic volatility/uncertainty, is there anything else that CEOs should be doing that we haven’t already discussed today? Download a Written Transcript of Our Conversation Access a text-based version of our discussion to highlight, copy or take notes by clicking on the button below Access Written Transcript Links to Resources Discussed During the Episode Book : The Four Disciplines of Execution , by Chris McChesney, Sean Covey, Jim Huling, Scott Thele, and Beverly Walker Book : The Great Game of Business , by Jack Stack Subscribe and Never Miss an Episode Subscribe wherever you enjoy podcasts: Apple Google Spotify Breaker Pocket Casts RadioPublic RSS Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Email Like this: Like Loading... Discover more from Subscribe to get the latest posts sent to your email. Type your email… Subscribe Posted by sdivitkos July 21, 2022 July 21, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: budgetting , cash , customers , financing , hiring , liquidity , management team , pricing , profitability , transparency Post navigation Previous Post Previous post: Busting the Biggest Myth About Purchasing and Operating Small Companies Next Post Next post: Strategic Considerations When Evaluating a Letter of Intent to Sell Your Business Leave a Reply Cancel reply Powered by WordPress.com . Discover more from Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website %d