Podcast- Managing Yourself Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Category Archives: Podcast- Managing Yourself Dr. Daniel Crosby on How our Psychology Impacts our Spending, Investing and Risk Taking Decisions My Guest This week I was thrilled to welcome Dr. Daniel Crosby to the podcast. Dr. Crosby is a behavioural finance expert, the Chief Behavioral Officer at Orion Advisor Solutions, a Psychologist, and a New York Times best-selling author. He has published four books, including Personal Benchmark: Integrating Behavioral Finance and Investment Management (a New Continue reading “Dr. Daniel Crosby on How our Psychology Impacts our Spending, Investing and Risk Taking Decisions” Posted by sdivitkos January 16, 2025 January 16, 2025 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: time , time management Leave a comment on Dr. Daniel Crosby on How our Psychology Impacts our Spending, Investing and Risk Taking Decisions The Link Between Money, Meaning, and Happiness My Guest Today I am thrilled to welcome Carl Richards to the podcast. Carl has spent decades as a Certified Financial Planner, is the creator of the Sketch Guy column (which appeared weekly for a decade in The New York Times), is a best selling author (most notably of The Behavior Gap: Simple Ways to Continue reading “The Link Between Money, Meaning, and Happiness” Posted by sdivitkos September 12, 2024 September 12, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: core values , goal setting , liquidity , time Leave a comment on The Link Between Money, Meaning, and Happiness The Entrepreneur and the Spousal Relationship: Part 2 My Guest Today I’m joined by Dr. Jennifer Musselman, a globally-recognized Marriage and Family Therapist and Executive Coach for high-performing executives and entrepreneurs. Dr. Musselman’s clinical work focuses on the interplay of work, life, self-identity and marriage, including the common stressors that impact performance and relationship satisfaction for entrepreneurs and other business leaders. Dr. Musselman Continue reading “The Entrepreneur and the Spousal Relationship: Part 2” Posted by sdivitkos August 29, 2024 August 29, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: communication , mental health , perfectionism , self care , spouses and partners Leave a comment on The Entrepreneur and the Spousal Relationship: Part 2 Dr. Bill Hudenko: Professor of Psychology at the Dartmouth School of Medicine and a 4x Founder & CEO My Guest Today I was thrilled to be joined by Dr. Bill Hudenko, an Assistant Professor of Clinical Psychology at the Dartmouth School of Medicine. In addition to his experience as a professor and clinician, Dr. Hudenko is also a 4x CEO & Entrepreneur, having founded and sold several companies that have utilized technology to Continue reading “Dr. Bill Hudenko: Professor of Psychology at the Dartmouth School of Medicine and a 4x Founder & CEO” Posted by sdivitkos August 15, 2024 August 15, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , depression , imposter syndrome , mental health , self care , selling a business , transparency Leave a comment on Dr. Bill Hudenko: Professor of Psychology at the Dartmouth School of Medicine and a 4x Founder & CEO Can Ambition and Inner Peace Coexist? With Rob Dube My Guest In 1991, Rob co-founded imageOne, a managed print services business based in Oak Park, Michigan. Since then, imageOne has been recognized as a Top 25 Small Businesses in America on the list of Forbes Small Giants, an Inc. Magazine Best Places to Work, a National Best and Brightest Company to Work For, one Continue reading “Can Ambition and Inner Peace Coexist? With Rob Dube” Posted by sdivitkos March 14, 2024 March 25, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , culture , depression , meditation , mental health , self care , transparency Leave a comment on Can Ambition and Inner Peace Coexist? With Rob Dube Conscious Leadership with Executive Coach and Best-Selling Author Kaley Klemp My Guest Kaley Klemp is a highly sought after CEO coach, YPO forum facilitator, and best-selling author. In 2015, Kaley co-authored The 15 Commitments of Conscious Leadership, a book that was met with instant critical and commercial success, and followed that up in 2021 with The 80/80 Marriage, a book about how to strengthen and Continue reading “Conscious Leadership with Executive Coach and Best-Selling Author Kaley Klemp” Posted by sdivitkos October 27, 2023 October 27, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: CEO time and emotion , communication , self care , spouses and partners , time management Leave a comment on Conscious Leadership with Executive Coach and Best-Selling Author Kaley Klemp “A Guide to the Good Life”: What Entrepreneurs Can Learn From Stoic Philosophy My Guest My guest today is Dr. William Irvine, author of the best-selling book A Guide to the Good Life: The Ancient Art of Stoic Joy. He is the author of several other books, including The Stoic Challenge, On Desire, and You: A Natural History (among others). Dr. Irvine’s work has been featured in countless Continue reading ““A Guide to the Good Life”: What Entrepreneurs Can Learn From Stoic Philosophy” Posted by sdivitkos August 17, 2023 August 17, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , mental health , self care , stoicism Leave a comment on “A Guide to the Good Life”: What Entrepreneurs Can Learn From Stoic Philosophy When Search Funds Don’t Go As Planned (Part 2): Trends & Observations With Jim Sharpe My Guest My guest today is Jim Sharpe, somebody who I’ve been fortunate enough to call a mentor and friend for over 10 years now. This is Jim’s second appearance on In The Trenches (you can access the first episode here) In this week’s episode, we build upon the first-hand accounts presented in episode 1 Continue reading “When Search Funds Don’t Go As Planned (Part 2): Trends & Observations With Jim Sharpe” Posted by sdivitkos July 6, 2023 July 6, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: buying a business , deal terms , focus , goal setting , LOIs , M&A , self care , spouses and partners Leave a comment on When Search Funds Don’t Go As Planned (Part 2): Trends & Observations With Jim Sharpe When Search Funds Don’t Go As Planned (Part 1): 3 Searcher Case Studies My Guests If one were to attend a randomly selected group of Search Fund conferences, they’d be forgiven for thinking that every search fund is a smashing success. When I was both a searcher and a CEO, I often left these types of events with a certain sense of insecurity and self-doubt, as everybody seemed Continue reading “When Search Funds Don’t Go As Planned (Part 1): 3 Searcher Case Studies” Posted by sdivitkos June 22, 2023 June 22, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: buying a business , CEO time and emotion , debt , imposter syndrome , M&A , mental health , selling a business 1 Comment on When Search Funds Don’t Go As Planned (Part 1): 3 Searcher Case Studies Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance My Guest This week, I was thrilled to be joined by Andy Johns. The bulk of Andy’s career has been spent in the start-up and technology ecosystems, with growth and product-oriented leadership roles at Facebook, Twitter, and Quora, among others. Following his time at these three companies, Andy became VP of Growth, VP of Product, Continue reading “Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance” Posted by sdivitkos April 27, 2023 April 27, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , depression , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care Leave a comment on Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance Posts pagination 1 2 Older posts Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website