M&A advisor – Page 2 Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: M&A advisor The Working Capital Adjustment Listen to This Blog Post In a previous blog post, Busting the Biggest Myth About Selling Your Business, we reviewed a number of fundamental facts related to the sale of any company that warrant being repeated here: The single biggest myth about selling a company is that the seller bears no further risk after the Continue reading “The Working Capital Adjustment” Posted by sdivitkos January 20, 2022 Posted in Selling Your Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , selling a business , valuation 4 Comments on The Working Capital Adjustment What M&A Lawyers Want CEOs to Know About Selling Their Companies My Guest Mario Nigro is one of Canada’s preeminent M&A lawyers, and currently serves as a Partner in the Mergers & Acquisitions and Private Equity & Venture Capital Groups at Stikeman Elliot based out of Toronto. His practice focuses on mergers and acquisitions, financings, complex corporate reorganizations, and general business law. Mario has extensive experience Continue reading “What M&A Lawyers Want CEOs to Know About Selling Their Companies” Posted by sdivitkos October 14, 2021 October 14, 2021 Posted in Podcast- Selling Your Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , selling a business , valuation Leave a comment on What M&A Lawyers Want CEOs to Know About Selling Their Companies Busting the Biggest Myth About Selling Your Business Listen to This Blog Post The entrepreneurial journey is full of innumerable risks: Your largest customers can leave at any time, and for any reason. The market may change faster than your company’s ability to adapt. Your largest supplier may decide to cut you out of the value chain and simply build your product themselves. Continue reading “Busting the Biggest Myth About Selling Your Business” Posted by sdivitkos August 5, 2021 July 11, 2022 Posted in Selling Your Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , M&A , M&A advisor , selling a business , valuation 7 Comments on Busting the Biggest Myth About Selling Your Business Considerations in Selecting Your M&A Advisor Listen to This Blog Post: Many entrepreneurs cite the exit process as being one of the most difficult, time consuming, and emotionally trying experiences of their lives. The reality of selling a company stands in stark contrast to the manner in which it’s often portrayed in the media, where the entrepreneur allows the accountants and Continue reading “Considerations in Selecting Your M&A Advisor” View post to subscribe to site newsletter. Posted by sdivitkos April 22, 2021 December 6, 2021 Posted in Selling Your Business Tags: deal terms , M&A , M&A advisor 1 Comment on Considerations in Selecting Your M&A Advisor What I Learned During my First (Failed) Attempt to Sell my Business Listen to This Blog Post: “You think running a business is hard? Try selling one”. That’s what one of my mentors said to me when I approached him in 2017 with the idea of selling my business the following year. His goal wasn’t to dissuade me from pursuing an exit, but rather to open my Continue reading “What I Learned During my First (Failed) Attempt to Sell my Business” Posted by sdivitkos March 25, 2021 December 6, 2021 Posted in Selling Your Business Tags: deal terms , forecasting , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , mental health , valuation 2 Comments on What I Learned During my First (Failed) Attempt to Sell my Business Posts pagination Newer posts 1 2 Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website