meditation Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: meditation Can Ambition and Inner Peace Coexist? With Rob Dube My Guest In 1991, Rob co-founded imageOne, a managed print services business based in Oak Park, Michigan. Since then, imageOne has been recognized as a Top 25 Small Businesses in America on the list of Forbes Small Giants, an Inc. Magazine Best Places to Work, a National Best and Brightest Company to Work For, one Continue reading “Can Ambition and Inner Peace Coexist? With Rob Dube” Posted by sdivitkos March 14, 2024 March 25, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , culture , depression , meditation , mental health , self care , transparency Leave a comment on Can Ambition and Inner Peace Coexist? With Rob Dube Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance My Guest This week, I was thrilled to be joined by Andy Johns. The bulk of Andy’s career has been spent in the start-up and technology ecosystems, with growth and product-oriented leadership roles at Facebook, Twitter, and Quora, among others. Following his time at these three companies, Andy became VP of Growth, VP of Product, Continue reading “Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance” Posted by sdivitkos April 27, 2023 April 27, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , depression , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care Leave a comment on Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance Tools in Managing My Own Psychology Listen to This Blog Post In a previous blog post, Lessons in Managing My Own Psychology, I presented the five most meaningful lessons that I had learned during my tenure as a CEO related to better managing my own emotions. In today’s post I get much more tactical, and discuss the specific tools, routines, and Continue reading “Tools in Managing My Own Psychology” Posted by sdivitkos November 10, 2022 September 14, 2023 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , depression , meditation , mental health , self care , stoicism 1 Comment on Tools in Managing My Own Psychology Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation My Guest My guest today is Carin-Isabel Knoop, Executive Director of the Harvard Business School Case Research & Writing Group. Carin has spent decades writing cases on managers and leaders all over the world across a wide array of functions and industries. In 2019, alongside co-author John Quelch, Carin published Compassionate Management of Mental Health Continue reading “Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation” Posted by sdivitkos May 26, 2022 August 7, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , culture , depression , HR , imposter syndrome , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care , spouses and partners , stoicism Leave a comment on Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO My Guest Dr. Eliana Cohen is an entrepreneur and Clinical Psychologist who runs her own practice, integrating performance psychology, strategy, emotional intelligence, and knowledge of neuroplasticity and the brain to serve her various clients. She has worked with countless entrepreneurs, business owners, and CEOs in her practice, and is passionate about discussing the psychological realities Continue reading “Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO” Posted by sdivitkos July 22, 2021 July 26, 2021 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , imposter syndrome , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care , time management Leave a comment on Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO Lessons in Managing My Own Psychology Listen to This Blog Post: Ben Horowitz, the world-renowned Venture Capitalist and co-founder of Andreesen Horowitz, said it best when he said: “By far the most difficult skill for me to learn as CEO was the ability to manage my own psychology . . .  very few people talk about it . . . In Continue reading “Lessons in Managing My Own Psychology” Posted by sdivitkos July 8, 2021 July 26, 2021 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: meditation , mental health , self care , stoicism 1 Comment on Lessons in Managing My Own Psychology Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website