profitability Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: profitability The Constellation Software Playbook for Acquiring and Growing Software Companies My Guest Constellation Software is one of the world’s most admired, well-followed, and well-respected software acquirors. Since their founding in 1995, they have acquired over 500 individual software companies, and have grown to achieve $8.4B in revenue and a $77B market capitalization. They have achieved these staggering metrics through their exclusive focus on the lower Continue reading “The Constellation Software Playbook for Acquiring and Growing Software Companies” Posted by sdivitkos April 11, 2024 April 11, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , growth , holding companies , M&A , pricing , product management , profitability , SaaS , selling a business , software , technical debt , valuation Leave a comment on The Constellation Software Playbook for Acquiring and Growing Software Companies Profit Before Anything Else: With Mike Michalowicz, Author of “Profit First” My Guest Today I’m joined by entrepreneur, investor, and best-selling author, Mike Michalowicz. Mike is the author of nine books, most notably Profit First, which boasts ~8,700 ratings on Amazon.com with an average rating of 4.8 stars. The book outlines a deceptively simple yet highly effective system to help businesses hit their target profit numbers Continue reading “Profit Before Anything Else: With Mike Michalowicz, Author of “Profit First”” Posted by sdivitkos February 14, 2024 February 14, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: budgetting , cash , customers , debt , forecasting , goal setting , growth , liquidity , profitability , selling a business , time , time management Leave a comment on Profit Before Anything Else: With Mike Michalowicz, Author of “Profit First” Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback: Educators, Mentors, and Leaders Within the SMB Community My Guests Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback are both professors at the Harvard Business School, and co-teach two wildly popular courses called The Financial Management of Smaller Firms and Entrepreneurship through Acquisition, both of which focus on how to acquire, finance and operate your own smaller firm. In 2017 they also co-published the widely read Continue reading “Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback: Educators, Mentors, and Leaders Within the SMB Community” Posted by sdivitkos February 1, 2024 February 1, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , incentives , M&A , profitability , SaaS , software , valuation , working with a partner Leave a comment on Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback: Educators, Mentors, and Leaders Within the SMB Community Jeff Stevens & A.J. Wasserstein on The Future of Entrepreneurship Through Acquisition My Guests A.J. Wasserstein is the Eugene F. Williams, Jr. Lecturer in the Practice of Management at the Yale School of Management. His research, writing, and teaching concentrates on search funds, entrepreneurship, programmatic acquisitions, and small businesses. In addition to his role as an educator, A.J. is also a private investor in lower middle-market businesses. Continue reading “Jeff Stevens & A.J. Wasserstein on The Future of Entrepreneurship Through Acquisition” Posted by sdivitkos January 18, 2024 January 18, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , incentives , M&A , profitability , SaaS , software , valuation Leave a comment on Jeff Stevens & A.J. Wasserstein on The Future of Entrepreneurship Through Acquisition Michael Girdley on The Rise of Holding Companies My Guest Michael Girdley is an entrepreneur and investor who has spent the past 30 years building a personal holding company boasting over $100M in annual revenue, comprised of 12 businesses across software, technology, consumer retail, and education, among others. Outside of managing his holding company, Michael is deeply involved in the North American SMB Continue reading “Michael Girdley on The Rise of Holding Companies” Posted by sdivitkos January 3, 2024 January 3, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: buying a business , growth , hiring , holding companies , M&A , profitability , SaaS , software , time management , valuation Leave a comment on Michael Girdley on The Rise of Holding Companies The 2023 SaaS CEO Survey Listen to this Blog Post The Data Set The year in which each target company was acquired is detailed in the chart to the right. As can be seen, we were able to achieve reasonably good diversity by vintage year, with 18 of the 41 transactions taking place in 2019 or earlier, and 23 of Continue reading “The 2023 SaaS CEO Survey” Posted by sdivitkos April 13, 2023 April 26, 2023 Posted in Managing Your Business (Software Specific) Tags: customers , focus , growth , product management , profitability , SaaS , software , technical debt Leave a comment on The 2023 SaaS CEO Survey Are You Selling to the Wrong Customers? Listen to this Blog Post In my experience, among the countless strategic decisions that software CEOs must make, the decision of which end markets to serve doesn’t seem to command the time, attention, and level of thoughtfulness that it probably should. Leaders who run mature and established companies often take comfort in the product/market fit Continue reading “Are You Selling to the Wrong Customers?” Posted by sdivitkos March 16, 2023 Posted in Managing Your Business (Software Specific) Tags: customers , focus , growth , product management , profitability , SaaS , software , technical debt Leave a comment on Are You Selling to the Wrong Customers? All Things Finance & Accounting: Managing Liquidity, Employee Financial Literacy, Capital Allocation, Macroeconomic Uncertainty, and Hiring Your First CFO My Guest Nicholas Andrews is the Founder of Aspen Consulting Group, a company that performs finance, accounting, and operations consulting for a wide range of small and medium sized businesses. Aspen’s services include technical accounting, corporate finance, valuations, operations planning and M&A due diligence, among others. Prior to founding the Aspen Consulting group, Nick was Continue reading “All Things Finance & Accounting: Managing Liquidity, Employee Financial Literacy, Capital Allocation, Macroeconomic Uncertainty, and Hiring Your First CFO” Posted by sdivitkos July 21, 2022 July 21, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: budgetting , cash , customers , financing , hiring , liquidity , management team , pricing , profitability , transparency Leave a comment on All Things Finance & Accounting: Managing Liquidity, Employee Financial Literacy, Capital Allocation, Macroeconomic Uncertainty, and Hiring Your First CFO Busting the Biggest Myth About Purchasing and Operating Small Companies Listen to This Blog Post In this second edition of our “Myth Busters” series (the first one can be found here), I attempt to debunk a common misconception among prospective acquirors, particularly those looking to purchase a business for the first time. This myth states that the smaller the business in question, the easier it Continue reading “Busting the Biggest Myth About Purchasing and Operating Small Companies” Posted by sdivitkos July 7, 2022 Posted in Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , growth , M&A , profitability , valuation Leave a comment on Busting the Biggest Myth About Purchasing and Operating Small Companies Managing a Business During Inflationary Periods & Understanding Pricing Power My Guest My guest today is a particularly personal and a particularly special one for me: I have been fortunate to call Jim Sharpe a mentor and friend for over 10 years now, and I am thrilled that he agreed to join the podcast. In this week’s episode, we discuss the realities of running a Continue reading “Managing a Business During Inflationary Periods & Understanding Pricing Power” Posted by sdivitkos June 23, 2022 June 23, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: communication , customers , pricing , profitability 1 Comment on Managing a Business During Inflationary Periods & Understanding Pricing Power Posts pagination 1 2 Older posts Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website