Podcast- Managing Yourself – Page 2 Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Category Archives: Podcast- Managing Yourself Everything You’ve Ever Wanted to Know About Working with a Partner, with Dr. Noam Wasserman, Author of The Founder’s Dilemmas My Guest My guest today is Noam Wasserman, recognized as one of the world’s foremost experts in how to form and maintain high performing partnerships in entrepreneurial contexts. Noam is currently the Dean of the Sy Syms School of Business at Yeshiva University in New York City. Prior to this, Noam was a professor at Continue reading “Everything You’ve Ever Wanted to Know About Working with a Partner, with Dr. Noam Wasserman, Author of The Founder’s Dilemmas” Posted by sdivitkos March 2, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: management team , spouses and partners , working with a partner Leave a comment on Everything You’ve Ever Wanted to Know About Working with a Partner, with Dr. Noam Wasserman, Author of The Founder’s Dilemmas Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation My Guest My guest today is Carin-Isabel Knoop, Executive Director of the Harvard Business School Case Research & Writing Group. Carin has spent decades writing cases on managers and leaders all over the world across a wide array of functions and industries. In 2019, alongside co-author John Quelch, Carin published Compassionate Management of Mental Health Continue reading “Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation” Posted by sdivitkos May 26, 2022 August 7, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , culture , depression , HR , imposter syndrome , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care , spouses and partners , stoicism Leave a comment on Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO My Guest Dr. Eliana Cohen is an entrepreneur and Clinical Psychologist who runs her own practice, integrating performance psychology, strategy, emotional intelligence, and knowledge of neuroplasticity and the brain to serve her various clients. She has worked with countless entrepreneurs, business owners, and CEOs in her practice, and is passionate about discussing the psychological realities Continue reading “Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO” Posted by sdivitkos July 22, 2021 July 26, 2021 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , imposter syndrome , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care , time management Leave a comment on Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO CEO Coaches: What do they do, how do they work with CEOs, and why might you consider hiring one? My Guest Warren Coughlin is both an entrepreneur and business coach, having worked directly with countless Entrepreneurs and CEOs for upwards of 20 years. His coaching practice focuses not only on the business itself, but also on the entrepreneur at a personal level, working with them to ensure that they craft meaningful values and live Continue reading “CEO Coaches: What do they do, how do they work with CEOs, and why might you consider hiring one?” Posted by sdivitkos June 24, 2021 July 26, 2021 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: CEO time and emotion , delegation , growth , self care , time management 1 Comment on CEO Coaches: What do they do, how do they work with CEOs, and why might you consider hiring one? Posts pagination Newer posts 1 2 Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website