Selling Your Business Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Category Archives: Selling Your Business Strategic Considerations When Evaluating a Letter of Intent to Sell Your Business Listen to This Blog Post For many business owners (particularly those actively looking to sell their companies), few things are as exciting as receiving a Letter of Intent (“LOI”) from a prospective purchaser. Beyond the sense of personal validation stemming from the fact that a sophisticated counterparty sees an asset worth paying for, many business Continue reading “Strategic Considerations When Evaluating a Letter of Intent to Sell Your Business” Posted by sdivitkos August 4, 2022 August 4, 2022 Posted in Selling Your Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , LOIs , M&A , selling a business , valuation 1 Comment on Strategic Considerations When Evaluating a Letter of Intent to Sell Your Business The Working Capital Adjustment Listen to This Blog Post In a previous blog post, Busting the Biggest Myth About Selling Your Business, we reviewed a number of fundamental facts related to the sale of any company that warrant being repeated here: The single biggest myth about selling a company is that the seller bears no further risk after the Continue reading “The Working Capital Adjustment” Posted by sdivitkos January 20, 2022 Posted in Selling Your Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , selling a business , valuation 4 Comments on The Working Capital Adjustment Busting the Biggest Myth About Selling Your Business Listen to This Blog Post The entrepreneurial journey is full of innumerable risks: Your largest customers can leave at any time, and for any reason. The market may change faster than your company’s ability to adapt. Your largest supplier may decide to cut you out of the value chain and simply build your product themselves. Continue reading “Busting the Biggest Myth About Selling Your Business” Posted by sdivitkos August 5, 2021 July 11, 2022 Posted in Selling Your Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , M&A , M&A advisor , selling a business , valuation 7 Comments on Busting the Biggest Myth About Selling Your Business Considerations in Selecting Your M&A Advisor Listen to This Blog Post: Many entrepreneurs cite the exit process as being one of the most difficult, time consuming, and emotionally trying experiences of their lives. The reality of selling a company stands in stark contrast to the manner in which it’s often portrayed in the media, where the entrepreneur allows the accountants and Continue reading “Considerations in Selecting Your M&A Advisor” View post to subscribe to site newsletter. Posted by sdivitkos April 22, 2021 December 6, 2021 Posted in Selling Your Business Tags: deal terms , M&A , M&A advisor 1 Comment on Considerations in Selecting Your M&A Advisor What I Learned During my First (Failed) Attempt to Sell my Business Listen to This Blog Post: “You think running a business is hard? Try selling one”. That’s what one of my mentors said to me when I approached him in 2017 with the idea of selling my business the following year. His goal wasn’t to dissuade me from pursuing an exit, but rather to open my Continue reading “What I Learned During my First (Failed) Attempt to Sell my Business” Posted by sdivitkos March 25, 2021 December 6, 2021 Posted in Selling Your Business Tags: deal terms , forecasting , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , mental health , valuation 2 Comments on What I Learned During my First (Failed) Attempt to Sell my Business Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website