core values Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: core values Five Ideas That Every CEO Should Know Listen to this Blog Post What follows are five unrelated thoughts on how to lead and grow a healthy and vibrant company. None of them are long enough to justify a stand-alone blog post, but all of them are important enough to highlight for current and aspiring CEOs. (1) Crafting an Effective Company-Wide Bonus Plan Continue reading “Five Ideas That Every CEO Should Know” Posted by sdivitkos October 24, 2024 November 18, 2024 Posted in Managing Your Business Tags: CEO time and emotion , compensation structure , core values , culture , delegation , focus , goal setting , hiring , incentives , pricing , time , time management Leave a comment on Five Ideas That Every CEO Should Know The Link Between Money, Meaning, and Happiness My Guest Today I am thrilled to welcome Carl Richards to the podcast. Carl has spent decades as a Certified Financial Planner, is the creator of the Sketch Guy column (which appeared weekly for a decade in The New York Times), is a best selling author (most notably of The Behavior Gap: Simple Ways to Continue reading “The Link Between Money, Meaning, and Happiness” Posted by sdivitkos September 12, 2024 September 12, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: core values , goal setting , liquidity , time Leave a comment on The Link Between Money, Meaning, and Happiness Evaluating Stock Options as Attraction, Retention, and Incentive Alignment Tools Listen to this Blog Post In my second year as a CEO, it became clear to me that our business could benefit from formalizing and codifying our company’s core values. Though I was originally fearful that they might quickly devolve into tired, clichéd, and mostly hollow platitudes, I eventually came to appreciate that if they Continue reading “Evaluating Stock Options as Attraction, Retention, and Incentive Alignment Tools” Posted by sdivitkos March 28, 2024 March 28, 2024 Posted in Managing Your Business Tags: board of directors , cash , compensation structure , core values , goal setting , growth , hiring , HR , incentives , liquidity , management team , salaries , selling a business , valuation Leave a comment on Evaluating Stock Options as Attraction, Retention, and Incentive Alignment Tools A Deep Dive on Compensation Listen in Your Browser Questions Asked Verne Harnish: Crafting Company-Wide Compensation Plans (3:06) Verne Harnish is the founder of the Entrepreneurs’ Organization (“EO” for short), a global network of entrepreneurs and CEOs that boasts over 16,000 members worldwide. He is the author of multiple global bestselling books including Mastering the Rockefeller Habits, and Scaling Up, Continue reading “A Deep Dive on Compensation” Posted by sdivitkos September 14, 2023 September 14, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: compensation structure , core values , culture , growth , hiring , HR , management team , onboarding , sales , sales compensation Leave a comment on A Deep Dive on Compensation A Deep Dive on Hiring Listen in Your Browser Questions Asked Randy Street (3:30) Many of you will know Randy Street as co-author of the book Who: The A Method for Hiring, which introduced the now widely used Topgrading hiring method to the world. The book went on to become a New York Times, Wall Street Journal, BusinessWeek, USA Today, Continue reading “A Deep Dive on Hiring” Posted by sdivitkos August 31, 2023 September 5, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: core values , culture , growth , hiring , HR , management team , onboarding , product management , sales Leave a comment on A Deep Dive on Hiring A.J. Wasserstein: Reflections of a Founder, CEO, Investor and Educator My Guest My guest today is A.J. Wasserstein, the Eugene F. Williams, Jr. Lecturer in the Practice of Management at the Yale School of Management. His research, writing, and teaching concentrates on search funds, entrepreneurship, programmatic acquisitions, and small businesses. In addition to his role as an educator, A.J. is also a private investor in Continue reading “A.J. Wasserstein: Reflections of a Founder, CEO, Investor and Educator” Posted by sdivitkos October 27, 2022 October 27, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: buying a business , core values , culture , customers , growth , hiring , M&A , self care 1 Comment on A.J. Wasserstein: Reflections of a Founder, CEO, Investor and Educator Should You Become an Entrepreneur? Listen to This Blog Post Within your first-degree network alone, I suspect you know a large number of people who, at one time or another, have expressed a desire to pursue an entrepreneurial career path. Yet I also suspect that, of those people, only a small percentage of them have actually elected to take the Continue reading “Should You Become an Entrepreneur?” Posted by sdivitkos May 12, 2022 May 12, 2022 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: core values , focus , imposter syndrome , self care Leave a comment on Should You Become an Entrepreneur? The Entrepreneur and the Spousal Relationship Listen to This Blog Post It’s no secret that meaningful and fulfilling relationships require deliberate work, often require trade-offs to be made between partners, and possess more than their fair share of peaks and valleys. Though these realities are true of substantially all long-term relationships, they seem to be especially true in instances where one Continue reading “The Entrepreneur and the Spousal Relationship” Posted by sdivitkos February 17, 2022 February 15, 2024 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: CEO time and emotion , communication , core values , mental health , self care , spouses and partners 3 Comments on The Entrepreneur and the Spousal Relationship Implementing a Formal Operating System Like EOS or the Rockefeller Habits Listen to this Blog Post Throughout recent history, there has been substantial growth in the number of companies who have decided to implement formal “operating systems” to govern certain strategic and operational decisions within their businesses. Though there are many operating systems in existence today, two of the most widely used systems are EOS (the Continue reading “Implementing a Formal Operating System Like EOS or the Rockefeller Habits” Posted by sdivitkos November 25, 2021 November 25, 2021 Posted in Managing Your Business Tags: core values , culture , focus , goal setting , growth , management team , strategy , time management Leave a comment on Implementing a Formal Operating System Like EOS or the Rockefeller Habits “Like Changing Tires on a Moving Car”: The Unseen Realities of Managing Rapid Growth My Guest Anthemos Georgiades (or Anth, for short), is the founder and CEO of Zumper, an apartment rental platform based out of San Francisco that he founded in his second year at Harvard Business School in 2012. If anybody knows anything about running a rapidly growing company, it’s Anth. Consider this: Despite being founded less Continue reading ““Like Changing Tires on a Moving Car”: The Unseen Realities of Managing Rapid Growth” Posted by sdivitkos November 11, 2021 December 5, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: buying a business , CEO time and emotion , core values , growth , hiring , imposter syndrome , M&A , management team , self care Leave a comment on “Like Changing Tires on a Moving Car”: The Unseen Realities of Managing Rapid Growth Posts pagination 1 2 Older posts Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website