mental health Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: mental health The Entrepreneur and the Spousal Relationship: Part 2 My Guest Today I’m joined by Dr. Jennifer Musselman, a globally-recognized Marriage and Family Therapist and Executive Coach for high-performing executives and entrepreneurs. Dr. Musselman’s clinical work focuses on the interplay of work, life, self-identity and marriage, including the common stressors that impact performance and relationship satisfaction for entrepreneurs and other business leaders. Dr. Musselman Continue reading “The Entrepreneur and the Spousal Relationship: Part 2” Posted by sdivitkos August 29, 2024 August 29, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: communication , mental health , perfectionism , self care , spouses and partners Leave a comment on The Entrepreneur and the Spousal Relationship: Part 2 Dr. Bill Hudenko: Professor of Psychology at the Dartmouth School of Medicine and a 4x Founder & CEO My Guest Today I was thrilled to be joined by Dr. Bill Hudenko, an Assistant Professor of Clinical Psychology at the Dartmouth School of Medicine. In addition to his experience as a professor and clinician, Dr. Hudenko is also a 4x CEO & Entrepreneur, having founded and sold several companies that have utilized technology to Continue reading “Dr. Bill Hudenko: Professor of Psychology at the Dartmouth School of Medicine and a 4x Founder & CEO” Posted by sdivitkos August 15, 2024 August 15, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , depression , imposter syndrome , mental health , self care , selling a business , transparency Leave a comment on Dr. Bill Hudenko: Professor of Psychology at the Dartmouth School of Medicine and a 4x Founder & CEO 17 Lessons on the Psychology of Being a Searcher and CEO Listen to this Blog Post A funny thing happened to me during my ~10 years as a searcher and CEO: Though I had an endless number of commercial problems and opportunities that required my attention at any given time, it was often the personal considerations that kept me up at night: Indeed, I rarely lost Continue reading “17 Lessons on the Psychology of Being a Searcher and CEO” Posted by sdivitkos July 18, 2024 July 18, 2024 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , imposter syndrome , mental health , self care , spouses and partners Leave a comment on 17 Lessons on the Psychology of Being a Searcher and CEO Can Ambition and Inner Peace Coexist? With Rob Dube My Guest In 1991, Rob co-founded imageOne, a managed print services business based in Oak Park, Michigan. Since then, imageOne has been recognized as a Top 25 Small Businesses in America on the list of Forbes Small Giants, an Inc. Magazine Best Places to Work, a National Best and Brightest Company to Work For, one Continue reading “Can Ambition and Inner Peace Coexist? With Rob Dube” Posted by sdivitkos March 14, 2024 March 25, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , culture , depression , meditation , mental health , self care , transparency Leave a comment on Can Ambition and Inner Peace Coexist? With Rob Dube My Experience With Anxiety Listen to this Blog Post I have debated whether to write this blog post for quite some time now, and my hesitation in doing so has been largely attributable to two things: First, as some of you may know, I create content quite regularly, and didn’t want a blog post as personal as this one Continue reading “My Experience With Anxiety” Posted by sdivitkos September 28, 2023 September 28, 2023 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , mental health , self care 1 Comment on My Experience With Anxiety “A Guide to the Good Life”: What Entrepreneurs Can Learn From Stoic Philosophy My Guest My guest today is Dr. William Irvine, author of the best-selling book A Guide to the Good Life: The Ancient Art of Stoic Joy. He is the author of several other books, including The Stoic Challenge, On Desire, and You: A Natural History (among others). Dr. Irvine’s work has been featured in countless Continue reading ““A Guide to the Good Life”: What Entrepreneurs Can Learn From Stoic Philosophy” Posted by sdivitkos August 17, 2023 August 17, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , mental health , self care , stoicism Leave a comment on “A Guide to the Good Life”: What Entrepreneurs Can Learn From Stoic Philosophy When Search Funds Don’t Go As Planned (Part 1): 3 Searcher Case Studies My Guests If one were to attend a randomly selected group of Search Fund conferences, they’d be forgiven for thinking that every search fund is a smashing success. When I was both a searcher and a CEO, I often left these types of events with a certain sense of insecurity and self-doubt, as everybody seemed Continue reading “When Search Funds Don’t Go As Planned (Part 1): 3 Searcher Case Studies” Posted by sdivitkos June 22, 2023 June 22, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: buying a business , CEO time and emotion , debt , imposter syndrome , M&A , mental health , selling a business 1 Comment on When Search Funds Don’t Go As Planned (Part 1): 3 Searcher Case Studies Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance My Guest This week, I was thrilled to be joined by Andy Johns. The bulk of Andy’s career has been spent in the start-up and technology ecosystems, with growth and product-oriented leadership roles at Facebook, Twitter, and Quora, among others. Following his time at these three companies, Andy became VP of Growth, VP of Product, Continue reading “Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance” Posted by sdivitkos April 27, 2023 April 27, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , depression , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care Leave a comment on Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance Evaluating the Correlation Between Hours Worked and Success Achieved Listen to this Post Though there are countless books, blogs, podcasts, and social media accounts that serve as thoughtful and informative resources for current and prospective entrepreneurs, unfortunately there appears to be an equal number of resources that demonstrate seemingly no limit to the fundamentally bad advice that they’re willing to impart upon others. Early Continue reading “Evaluating the Correlation Between Hours Worked and Success Achieved” Posted by sdivitkos February 16, 2023 August 16, 2023 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , imposter syndrome , mental health , self care , time , time management 1 Comment on Evaluating the Correlation Between Hours Worked and Success Achieved Tools in Managing My Own Psychology Listen to This Blog Post In a previous blog post, Lessons in Managing My Own Psychology, I presented the five most meaningful lessons that I had learned during my tenure as a CEO related to better managing my own emotions. In today’s post I get much more tactical, and discuss the specific tools, routines, and Continue reading “Tools in Managing My Own Psychology” Posted by sdivitkos November 10, 2022 September 14, 2023 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , depression , meditation , mental health , self care , stoicism 1 Comment on Tools in Managing My Own Psychology Posts pagination 1 2 Older posts Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website