time Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: time Dr. Daniel Crosby on How our Psychology Impacts our Spending, Investing and Risk Taking Decisions My Guest This week I was thrilled to welcome Dr. Daniel Crosby to the podcast. Dr. Crosby is a behavioural finance expert, the Chief Behavioral Officer at Orion Advisor Solutions, a Psychologist, and a New York Times best-selling author. He has published four books, including Personal Benchmark: Integrating Behavioral Finance and Investment Management (a New Continue reading “Dr. Daniel Crosby on How our Psychology Impacts our Spending, Investing and Risk Taking Decisions” Posted by sdivitkos January 16, 2025 January 16, 2025 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: time , time management Leave a comment on Dr. Daniel Crosby on How our Psychology Impacts our Spending, Investing and Risk Taking Decisions Five Ideas That Every CEO Should Know Listen to this Blog Post What follows are five unrelated thoughts on how to lead and grow a healthy and vibrant company. None of them are long enough to justify a stand-alone blog post, but all of them are important enough to highlight for current and aspiring CEOs. (1) Crafting an Effective Company-Wide Bonus Plan Continue reading “Five Ideas That Every CEO Should Know” Posted by sdivitkos October 24, 2024 November 18, 2024 Posted in Managing Your Business Tags: CEO time and emotion , compensation structure , core values , culture , delegation , focus , goal setting , hiring , incentives , pricing , time , time management Leave a comment on Five Ideas That Every CEO Should Know The Link Between Money, Meaning, and Happiness My Guest Today I am thrilled to welcome Carl Richards to the podcast. Carl has spent decades as a Certified Financial Planner, is the creator of the Sketch Guy column (which appeared weekly for a decade in The New York Times), is a best selling author (most notably of The Behavior Gap: Simple Ways to Continue reading “The Link Between Money, Meaning, and Happiness” Posted by sdivitkos September 12, 2024 September 12, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: core values , goal setting , liquidity , time Leave a comment on The Link Between Money, Meaning, and Happiness Answers to Recurring FAQs from Current and Prospective Searchers Listen to this Blog Post Over the course of many years speaking with current and prospective searchers on a near-daily basis, I’ve come to appreciate that many searchers understandably tend to have very similar questions and areas of uncertainty. Indeed, in most instances, I had these very same questions and areas of uncertainty myself prior Continue reading “Answers to Recurring FAQs from Current and Prospective Searchers” Posted by sdivitkos February 29, 2024 February 29, 2024 Posted in Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , CEO time and emotion , communication , customers , focus , goal setting , LOIs , M&A , time , time management Leave a comment on Answers to Recurring FAQs from Current and Prospective Searchers Profit Before Anything Else: With Mike Michalowicz, Author of “Profit First” My Guest Today I’m joined by entrepreneur, investor, and best-selling author, Mike Michalowicz. Mike is the author of nine books, most notably Profit First, which boasts ~8,700 ratings on Amazon.com with an average rating of 4.8 stars. The book outlines a deceptively simple yet highly effective system to help businesses hit their target profit numbers Continue reading “Profit Before Anything Else: With Mike Michalowicz, Author of “Profit First”” Posted by sdivitkos February 14, 2024 February 14, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: budgetting , cash , customers , debt , forecasting , goal setting , growth , liquidity , profitability , selling a business , time , time management Leave a comment on Profit Before Anything Else: With Mike Michalowicz, Author of “Profit First” Evaluating the Correlation Between Hours Worked and Success Achieved Listen to this Post Though there are countless books, blogs, podcasts, and social media accounts that serve as thoughtful and informative resources for current and prospective entrepreneurs, unfortunately there appears to be an equal number of resources that demonstrate seemingly no limit to the fundamentally bad advice that they’re willing to impart upon others. Early Continue reading “Evaluating the Correlation Between Hours Worked and Success Achieved” Posted by sdivitkos February 16, 2023 August 16, 2023 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , imposter syndrome , mental health , self care , time , time management 1 Comment on Evaluating the Correlation Between Hours Worked and Success Achieved Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website