negotiations Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: negotiations How to Avoid Common Stumbling Blocks in an M&A Process: with Raam Jani My Guest This week I was thrilled to welcome Raam Jani to the podcast, who is one of the most experienced lawyers in the Search Fund ecosystem, and within the small business M&A ecosystem more broadly. Raam is currently a partner at Baker Hostetler, where he works on a variety of mandates, advising private equity Continue reading “How to Avoid Common Stumbling Blocks in an M&A Process: with Raam Jani” Posted by sdivitkos February 12, 2025 February 12, 2025 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , negotiations , selling a business , valuation Leave a comment on How to Avoid Common Stumbling Blocks in an M&A Process: with Raam Jani How to Get Your Exit Proceeds (Mostly) Tax Free My Guests This week, we explore two separate mechanisms that may allow acquisition entrepreneurs and their investors to receive their exit proceeds largely free of tax. Relative to how powerful these programs can be, both are not fully understood within the Search Fund community, especially among new and prospective searchers. In the first half of Continue reading “How to Get Your Exit Proceeds (Mostly) Tax Free” Posted by sdivitkos January 30, 2025 January 30, 2025 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , LOIs , M&A , negotiations , selling a business , tax , valuation Leave a comment on How to Get Your Exit Proceeds (Mostly) Tax Free In Conversation with 3 Founders Who Sold Their Companies to Search Funds My Guests Properly managing the relationship with the outgoing seller is likely to be among your most important tasks within your first 6 months as the new CEO. I say this because a non-functional (or worse, a toxic) relationship between the incoming and outgoing owners has the potential to damage a company more than customers Continue reading “In Conversation with 3 Founders Who Sold Their Companies to Search Funds” Posted by sdivitkos October 10, 2024 October 10, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , LOIs , M&A , negotiations , SaaS , selling a business , software , valuation Leave a comment on In Conversation with 3 Founders Who Sold Their Companies to Search Funds Why You May Be Ignoring Brokered Deals at Your Peril My Guest My guest today is Ryan Farkas, a Partner, Managing Director and the Practice Leader in M&A and Capital Markets in BDO’s Central Canada region. Ryan has successfully closed countless sell-side advisory transactions in various industries spanning manufacturing, consumer discretionary, construction, engineering, automotive and information technology. Ryan has also worked on several large performance Continue reading “Why You May Be Ignoring Brokered Deals at Your Peril” Posted by sdivitkos May 23, 2024 May 23, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , negotiations , selling a business , valuation Leave a comment on Why You May Be Ignoring Brokered Deals at Your Peril Dr. Victoria Medvec on the Art and Science of High Stakes Negotiations My Guest Dr. Victoria Medvec is the Adeline Barry Davee Professor of Management and Organizations at the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University. In addition to her professorship, Dr. Medvec is a co-founder and the Executive Director of the Center for Executive Women at the Kellogg School and the CEO of Medvec and Associates, Continue reading “Dr. Victoria Medvec on the Art and Science of High Stakes Negotiations” Posted by sdivitkos November 23, 2023 November 29, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: buying a business , communication , deal terms , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , negotiations , selling a business Leave a comment on Dr. Victoria Medvec on the Art and Science of High Stakes Negotiations Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website