culture Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: culture Five Ideas That Every CEO Should Know Listen to this Blog Post What follows are five unrelated thoughts on how to lead and grow a healthy and vibrant company. None of them are long enough to justify a stand-alone blog post, but all of them are important enough to highlight for current and aspiring CEOs. (1) Crafting an Effective Company-Wide Bonus Plan Continue reading “Five Ideas That Every CEO Should Know” Posted by sdivitkos October 24, 2024 November 18, 2024 Posted in Managing Your Business Tags: CEO time and emotion , compensation structure , core values , culture , delegation , focus , goal setting , hiring , incentives , pricing , time , time management Leave a comment on Five Ideas That Every CEO Should Know Can Ambition and Inner Peace Coexist? With Rob Dube My Guest In 1991, Rob co-founded imageOne, a managed print services business based in Oak Park, Michigan. Since then, imageOne has been recognized as a Top 25 Small Businesses in America on the list of Forbes Small Giants, an Inc. Magazine Best Places to Work, a National Best and Brightest Company to Work For, one Continue reading “Can Ambition and Inner Peace Coexist? With Rob Dube” Posted by sdivitkos March 14, 2024 March 25, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , culture , depression , meditation , mental health , self care , transparency Leave a comment on Can Ambition and Inner Peace Coexist? With Rob Dube Building a $5.5B Mid-Market Private Equity Firm: Brent Belzberg, Founder of Torquest Partners My Guest My guest today is Brent Belzberg, Founder and Senior Managing Partner of TorQuest, a middle market private equity firm that he founded in 2002 that has since grown to ~$5.5B in assets under management. Outside of TorQuest, Brent serves as a Director of The Sinai Health System, having previously acted as Chair. He Continue reading “Building a $5.5B Mid-Market Private Equity Firm: Brent Belzberg, Founder of Torquest Partners” Posted by sdivitkos October 12, 2023 October 12, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: buying a business , compensation structure , culture , delegation , financing , growth , LOIs , M&A , selling a business Leave a comment on Building a $5.5B Mid-Market Private Equity Firm: Brent Belzberg, Founder of Torquest Partners A Deep Dive on Compensation Listen in Your Browser Questions Asked Verne Harnish: Crafting Company-Wide Compensation Plans (3:06) Verne Harnish is the founder of the Entrepreneurs’ Organization (“EO” for short), a global network of entrepreneurs and CEOs that boasts over 16,000 members worldwide. He is the author of multiple global bestselling books including Mastering the Rockefeller Habits, and Scaling Up, Continue reading “A Deep Dive on Compensation” Posted by sdivitkos September 14, 2023 September 14, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: compensation structure , core values , culture , growth , hiring , HR , management team , onboarding , sales , sales compensation Leave a comment on A Deep Dive on Compensation A Deep Dive on Hiring Listen in Your Browser Questions Asked Randy Street (3:30) Many of you will know Randy Street as co-author of the book Who: The A Method for Hiring, which introduced the now widely used Topgrading hiring method to the world. The book went on to become a New York Times, Wall Street Journal, BusinessWeek, USA Today, Continue reading “A Deep Dive on Hiring” Posted by sdivitkos August 31, 2023 September 5, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: core values , culture , growth , hiring , HR , management team , onboarding , product management , sales Leave a comment on A Deep Dive on Hiring The Smallest Changes That Had the Largest Impacts: 4 CEO Case Studies My Guests This is a very special episode of In The Trenches: In today’s episode, I will be interviewing 4 different CEOs of 4 different SMBs, and asking them just a single question: “What are some of the seemingly small changes you’ve made that have had the largest impacts?” When taking over a new business, Continue reading “The Smallest Changes That Had the Largest Impacts: 4 CEO Case Studies” Posted by sdivitkos February 2, 2023 February 2, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: buying a business , culture , growth , hiring , HR , M&A , software , spouses and partners Leave a comment on The Smallest Changes That Had the Largest Impacts: 4 CEO Case Studies Mike Zani, CEO of The Predictive Index: Hiring, Personality Profiling Tools, Working with a Partner, and Other Lessons from 20 Years as a CEO My Guests My guest today is Mike Zani, CEO of The Predictive Index. The Predictive Index serves more than 9,000 clients across 142 countries, helping businesses optimize their hiring and team composition decisions through a combination of behavioral science, software, and professional consulting from the world’s top workplace behavior specialists. Mike has been CEO of Continue reading “Mike Zani, CEO of The Predictive Index: Hiring, Personality Profiling Tools, Working with a Partner, and Other Lessons from 20 Years as a CEO” Posted by sdivitkos January 5, 2023 July 27, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: buying a business , culture , growth , hiring , HR , M&A , software , spouses and partners Leave a comment on Mike Zani, CEO of The Predictive Index: Hiring, Personality Profiling Tools, Working with a Partner, and Other Lessons from 20 Years as a CEO A.J. Wasserstein: Reflections of a Founder, CEO, Investor and Educator My Guest My guest today is A.J. Wasserstein, the Eugene F. Williams, Jr. Lecturer in the Practice of Management at the Yale School of Management. His research, writing, and teaching concentrates on search funds, entrepreneurship, programmatic acquisitions, and small businesses. In addition to his role as an educator, A.J. is also a private investor in Continue reading “A.J. Wasserstein: Reflections of a Founder, CEO, Investor and Educator” Posted by sdivitkos October 27, 2022 October 27, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: buying a business , core values , culture , customers , growth , hiring , M&A , self care 1 Comment on A.J. Wasserstein: Reflections of a Founder, CEO, Investor and Educator Knowing Who, When, and How to Fire I will never forget the first time that I had to fire somebody. In the days, hours and minutes leading up to the meeting that morning, sleep was elusive, my heart was racing, my mind was completely incapable of focusing on anything else, and the sense of existential dread growing in the pit of my Continue reading “Knowing Who, When, and How to Fire” Posted by sdivitkos September 15, 2022 November 2, 2022 Posted in Managing Your Business Tags: communication , culture , firing , hiring , HR , transparency Leave a comment on Knowing Who, When, and How to Fire Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation My Guest My guest today is Carin-Isabel Knoop, Executive Director of the Harvard Business School Case Research & Writing Group. Carin has spent decades writing cases on managers and leaders all over the world across a wide array of functions and industries. In 2019, alongside co-author John Quelch, Carin published Compassionate Management of Mental Health Continue reading “Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation” Posted by sdivitkos May 26, 2022 August 7, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , culture , depression , HR , imposter syndrome , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care , spouses and partners , stoicism Leave a comment on Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation Posts pagination 1 2 Older posts Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website