deal terms Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: deal terms How to Avoid Common Stumbling Blocks in an M&A Process: with Raam Jani My Guest This week I was thrilled to welcome Raam Jani to the podcast, who is one of the most experienced lawyers in the Search Fund ecosystem, and within the small business M&A ecosystem more broadly. Raam is currently a partner at Baker Hostetler, where he works on a variety of mandates, advising private equity Continue reading “How to Avoid Common Stumbling Blocks in an M&A Process: with Raam Jani” Posted by sdivitkos February 12, 2025 February 12, 2025 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , negotiations , selling a business , valuation Leave a comment on How to Avoid Common Stumbling Blocks in an M&A Process: with Raam Jani How to Get Your Exit Proceeds (Mostly) Tax Free My Guests This week, we explore two separate mechanisms that may allow acquisition entrepreneurs and their investors to receive their exit proceeds largely free of tax. Relative to how powerful these programs can be, both are not fully understood within the Search Fund community, especially among new and prospective searchers. In the first half of Continue reading “How to Get Your Exit Proceeds (Mostly) Tax Free” Posted by sdivitkos January 30, 2025 January 30, 2025 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , LOIs , M&A , negotiations , selling a business , tax , valuation Leave a comment on How to Get Your Exit Proceeds (Mostly) Tax Free In Conversation with 3 Founders Who Sold Their Companies to Search Funds My Guests Properly managing the relationship with the outgoing seller is likely to be among your most important tasks within your first 6 months as the new CEO. I say this because a non-functional (or worse, a toxic) relationship between the incoming and outgoing owners has the potential to damage a company more than customers Continue reading “In Conversation with 3 Founders Who Sold Their Companies to Search Funds” Posted by sdivitkos October 10, 2024 October 10, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , LOIs , M&A , negotiations , SaaS , selling a business , software , valuation Leave a comment on In Conversation with 3 Founders Who Sold Their Companies to Search Funds From $7M to $50M via 14 Acquisitions: A Consolidation Success Story With Jay Davis & Jason Pananos My Guests After graduating from business school in 2008, Jay Davis & Jason Pananos acquired Vector Disease Control, a company that they grew from ~$7M to ~$50M in revenue in 7 years through successfully executing on 14 bolt-on acquisitions. They were able to grow the business by a 43% compounded annual growth rate before selling Continue reading “From $7M to $50M via 14 Acquisitions: A Consolidation Success Story With Jay Davis & Jason Pananos” Posted by sdivitkos June 6, 2024 June 6, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , debt , financing , growth , incentives , M&A , time management , valuation , working with a partner Leave a comment on From $7M to $50M via 14 Acquisitions: A Consolidation Success Story With Jay Davis & Jason Pananos Why You May Be Ignoring Brokered Deals at Your Peril My Guest My guest today is Ryan Farkas, a Partner, Managing Director and the Practice Leader in M&A and Capital Markets in BDO’s Central Canada region. Ryan has successfully closed countless sell-side advisory transactions in various industries spanning manufacturing, consumer discretionary, construction, engineering, automotive and information technology. Ryan has also worked on several large performance Continue reading “Why You May Be Ignoring Brokered Deals at Your Peril” Posted by sdivitkos May 23, 2024 May 23, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , negotiations , selling a business , valuation Leave a comment on Why You May Be Ignoring Brokered Deals at Your Peril Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback: Educators, Mentors, and Leaders Within the SMB Community My Guests Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback are both professors at the Harvard Business School, and co-teach two wildly popular courses called The Financial Management of Smaller Firms and Entrepreneurship through Acquisition, both of which focus on how to acquire, finance and operate your own smaller firm. In 2017 they also co-published the widely read Continue reading “Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback: Educators, Mentors, and Leaders Within the SMB Community” Posted by sdivitkos February 1, 2024 February 1, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , incentives , M&A , profitability , SaaS , software , valuation , working with a partner Leave a comment on Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback: Educators, Mentors, and Leaders Within the SMB Community Jeff Stevens & A.J. Wasserstein on The Future of Entrepreneurship Through Acquisition My Guests A.J. Wasserstein is the Eugene F. Williams, Jr. Lecturer in the Practice of Management at the Yale School of Management. His research, writing, and teaching concentrates on search funds, entrepreneurship, programmatic acquisitions, and small businesses. In addition to his role as an educator, A.J. is also a private investor in lower middle-market businesses. Continue reading “Jeff Stevens & A.J. Wasserstein on The Future of Entrepreneurship Through Acquisition” Posted by sdivitkos January 18, 2024 January 18, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , incentives , M&A , profitability , SaaS , software , valuation Leave a comment on Jeff Stevens & A.J. Wasserstein on The Future of Entrepreneurship Through Acquisition Questions You Should Be Prepared to Answer Before Buying (or Selling) a Small Business Listen to this Blog Post It likely goes without saying that every transaction is different: Every company, industry, searcher, and investment opportunity presents unique considerations that in turn give rise to unique questions and areas for further due diligence. With that said, over many years of evaluating countless acquisition targets alongside searchers, I’ve found that Continue reading “Questions You Should Be Prepared to Answer Before Buying (or Selling) a Small Business” Posted by sdivitkos December 21, 2023 December 21, 2023 Posted in Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , M&A , metrics , SaaS , selling a business , software , valuation Leave a comment on Questions You Should Be Prepared to Answer Before Buying (or Selling) a Small Business Dr. Victoria Medvec on the Art and Science of High Stakes Negotiations My Guest Dr. Victoria Medvec is the Adeline Barry Davee Professor of Management and Organizations at the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University. In addition to her professorship, Dr. Medvec is a co-founder and the Executive Director of the Center for Executive Women at the Kellogg School and the CEO of Medvec and Associates, Continue reading “Dr. Victoria Medvec on the Art and Science of High Stakes Negotiations” Posted by sdivitkos November 23, 2023 November 29, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: buying a business , communication , deal terms , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , negotiations , selling a business Leave a comment on Dr. Victoria Medvec on the Art and Science of High Stakes Negotiations Peter Lehrman, Founder & CEO of Axial, The Largest Online Marketplace to Buy & Sell SMBs My Guest Peter Lehrman is the Founder and CEO of Axial, North America’s #1 online platform connecting buyers and sellers of small and medium sized businesses. Axial is used by over 20,000 investors, M&A advisors and CEOs, allowing them to connect on a confidential basis to explore potential M&A, debt, buyout, and growth equity transactions, Continue reading “Peter Lehrman, Founder & CEO of Axial, The Largest Online Marketplace to Buy & Sell SMBs” Posted by sdivitkos November 9, 2023 November 9, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , liquidity , M&A , M&A advisor , selling a business , valuation Leave a comment on Peter Lehrman, Founder & CEO of Axial, The Largest Online Marketplace to Buy & Sell SMBs Posts pagination 1 2 3 Older posts Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website