Testimonials Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Searcher & CEO Testimonials Hear from the entrepreneurs with whom we have worked directly Paul Winkels CEO, Allied Threaded Products “ Thank you for your support as both a search-stage investor and an advisor throughout this adventure. Your passion for the entire search ecosystem and genuine concern for the financial, professional, and personal well-being of your investees is remarkable. All deals need financing, but you bring so much more to the table than simply being another “money guy” – all investors are not created equal! ” Andrew Diaz Co-CEO, CureCare “ Steve has been an outstanding and invaluable board member, consistently offering profound insights drawn from his wealth of experience. His guidance has been instrumental in helping us navigate challenges, enabling us to avoid pitfalls and learn from past mistakes without having to experience them ourselves. His ability to anticipate issues and provide thoughtful solutions has had a tremendous impact on our decision-making process. We couldn’t be more thrilled to benefit from his wisdom, which continues to shape our direction and drive our success .” Andrew Petrie Three Meadows Partners “ Working with Steve has been a game changer. He has accelerated my growth as a searcher in so many ways and I would not be in the position I am today without him. Not only does Steve respond incredibly fast to questions or pick up the phone whenever you call him, but he always provides thoughtful guidance and feedback that really help you think critically about a business, seller relationship, or challenges with a deal. I think Steve is a ‘must have’ on your cap table if you have the opportunity to partner with him – I’m glad he’s on my team. “ Ryan Moore Sligo Capital “ Steve has been an incredibly helpful partner throughout my search. His insightful perspective and disciplined approach have enabled me reach conclusions quickly and effectively. He consistently asks the tough questions, ensuring clarity and focus, and is always accessible when I need guidance. I would highly recommend partnering with Steve for anyone looking to elevate their search fund experience. ” Mark Jarvie Hillside Succession “ Steve has been a fantastic support to my search. As a past searcher, he understands the journey and can play different roles (as an investor) depending on where you find yourself on the search timeline. When working on deals, Steve takes the time to come prepared, ensuring a thoughtful, two-way dialogue. He clearly articulates his thought process when sharing advice, which is extremely helpful as a searcher when building that ‘deal muscle.’ I cannot recommend Steve enough to other searchers. “ Diliana Dimitrova Avalerian Capital “ Steve has been great to work with during my search. He is one of my most thoughtful and engaged investors, and he always takes time to give very detailed, thought-through advice on the deals that I am looking at and on search more broadly. He comes at it from the perspective of being a former CEO, so his advice is very actionable and practical, and he is open-minded to a variety of deals. I would fully recommend working with Steve as an investor. “ Karl Laughton Software Legacy Partners “I would encourage all prospective searchers to find people as valuable as Steve for their investor group. I consider myself lucky to have him. Steve has a unique way of removing his own interests from a deal so that he can be most helpful to you as the entrepreneur in evaluating it and understanding the most successful path forward. Then he checks back in as an investor and clearly communicates the work that needs to be done for him to participate in it. He finds time for you when its needed on short notice, and can connect with you about the human elements of leadership and search.” Dave Ritchie Withrow Park Growth “Steve Divitkos is at the very top of forward-thinking investors in the search fund space. With Steve on my cap table, I knew that I had someone who is a profoundly thoughtful promotor of me and my success. Whether it’s as a sounding board, a second set of eyes or just someone who has the hard-earned scars of the search fund experience, you want to have Mineola as a partner.” Matt Fiedelholtz Camden Park Capital “Steve has without a doubt been one of my best investors. His thoughtfulness, empathy, and depth of engagement are truly unique in the search community. Whether I’m facing a very tactical issue such as email deliverability or seeking strategic advice on how best to handle a difficult conversation with a seller, Steve is always one of my first calls. It’s hard to imagine having searched without him as a partner.” Maximilien Le Sieur CEO, TelcoBridges “Steve’s insight and expertise make him one of the most astute investors I’ve had the privilege to work with. If he supports your deal, it’s a significant endorsement. He goes above and beyond to provide feedback and support which allows first time CEOs to navigate key business challenges with confidence. His deep knowledge of Canadian tax regulations has been instrumental in optimizing my capital structure, resulting in immediate and measurable benefits for both myself and our limited partners. I wholeheartedly recommend having Steve on your cap table if the opportunity arises.” Jide Adesoye Mile-12 Group “Steve has been and continues to be an incredibly valuable thought partner to me along my search journey. From iterating on a thesis to helping me diligence both pipeline and live opportunities, he’s proven himself to be best-in-class among investors today. I couldn’t recommend him highly enough to Searchers and CEOs looking for truly differentiated support from someone who’s been in your seat before.” Sekou Calliste Island Heritage Partners “Working with Steve is a truly collaborative experience. He consistently engages with every update, idea, or potential transaction, offering thoughtful, strategic feedback. No matter the ask, Steve always makes time to respond, ensuring that you feel supported and confident in your approach. 2. Steve brings a unique partnership to the table, grounded in his deep understanding of the search ecosystem. Having navigated the journey himself, he offers a realistic, empathetic perspective that allows searchers to be open and honest about their challenges. This level of trust and support is invaluable during the highs and lows of such an arduous process, making him a truly reliable and insightful investor.” John O’Brien CEO, EchoPoint Books & Media “I first met Steve nearly a year into my search, and despite not being on my cap table he was unfailingly generous with his time – even at points when I had nothing formally under LOI. When an equity gap opened in my acquisition of Echo Point, Steve was one of my first calls. Through searching, due diligence, and operating, my appreciation for him as a thought partner and sounding board has only grown over the last several years.” Chris Tyler Search Party Capital “Steve first came on my radar through his blog and podcast. He influenced my thinking about self funded vs traditional search and my search strategy. Now that I’m searching, I’m glad Steve is in my cap table. He’s an independent thinker who strikes a nice balance between being opinionated and open minded. He’s one of the hardest working search investors and a big advocate for people in his cap table.” Maxime Aymonod Alpex Capital “I love working with Steve. He has first hand experience as a successful former searcher and operator, and his pragmatic advice was helpful at every stage of my search. During diligence, he spent a lot of time trying to understand the opportunity and help me prioritize critical areas. He is also a nice person and is willing to talk about the emotional aspect of searching. I love listening to his podcast which I always find helpful. “ Andrew Head Grace Court Partners “Steve carries a unique blend of candor and empathy that has been invaluable to us throughout our search.” Tim Haitaian CEO, Desert Services “Steve is a great partner and I feel lucky to be working with him in my acquisition today. He’s accessible and willing to provide candid, thoughtful advice; two of the most important measures of a search investor. He also fully understands the life of a searcher, CEO, and now investor. You should feel lucky to have someone like Steve on your cap table.” Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website