self care – Page 3 Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: self care Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO My Guest Dr. Eliana Cohen is an entrepreneur and Clinical Psychologist who runs her own practice, integrating performance psychology, strategy, emotional intelligence, and knowledge of neuroplasticity and the brain to serve her various clients. She has worked with countless entrepreneurs, business owners, and CEOs in her practice, and is passionate about discussing the psychological realities Continue reading “Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO” Posted by sdivitkos July 22, 2021 July 26, 2021 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , imposter syndrome , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care , time management Leave a comment on Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO Lessons in Managing My Own Psychology Listen to This Blog Post: Ben Horowitz, the world-renowned Venture Capitalist and co-founder of Andreesen Horowitz, said it best when he said: “By far the most difficult skill for me to learn as CEO was the ability to manage my own psychology . . .  very few people talk about it . . . In Continue reading “Lessons in Managing My Own Psychology” Posted by sdivitkos July 8, 2021 July 26, 2021 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: meditation , mental health , self care , stoicism 1 Comment on Lessons in Managing My Own Psychology CEO Coaches: What do they do, how do they work with CEOs, and why might you consider hiring one? My Guest Warren Coughlin is both an entrepreneur and business coach, having worked directly with countless Entrepreneurs and CEOs for upwards of 20 years. His coaching practice focuses not only on the business itself, but also on the entrepreneur at a personal level, working with them to ensure that they craft meaningful values and live Continue reading “CEO Coaches: What do they do, how do they work with CEOs, and why might you consider hiring one?” Posted by sdivitkos June 24, 2021 July 26, 2021 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: CEO time and emotion , delegation , growth , self care , time management 1 Comment on CEO Coaches: What do they do, how do they work with CEOs, and why might you consider hiring one? The Entrepreneur and Mental Health (Part 1): My Journey Listen to this Blog Post: Generally speaking, the average person is not fully aware of the emotional toll that entrepreneurship (or any other type of leadership, for that matter) can take. This could be due to the fact that most leaders tend to be uncomfortable with the idea of vulnerability, and instead choose to “shield” Continue reading “The Entrepreneur and Mental Health (Part 1): My Journey” Posted by sdivitkos February 17, 2021 July 26, 2021 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , depression , mental health , self care 2 Comments on The Entrepreneur and Mental Health (Part 1): My Journey The Entrepreneur and Mental Health (Part 2): My Advice to You Listen to This Blog Post: This post is the second in a two-part blog post on leadership and mental health. Before proceeding forward, I suggest that you read Part 1 here. In the now-famous Netflix Documentary “The Last Dance”, which documented Michael Jordan and the dominant Chicago Bulls of the mid-90s, Michael Jordan said something Continue reading “The Entrepreneur and Mental Health (Part 2): My Advice to You” Posted by sdivitkos February 17, 2021 December 6, 2021 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: mental health , self care , time management 7 Comments on The Entrepreneur and Mental Health (Part 2): My Advice to You Posts pagination Newer posts 1 2 3 Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website