Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Mineola Search Partners Investing in Search Funds, the entrepreneurs who run them, and the businesses that they acquire Go to the Blog Go to the Podcast At a macro level, to say that small businesses are important would be a dramatic understatement: Given that over 90% of all companies within North America have fewer than 100 employees, small businesses are the engine of the North American economy, and by extension, have a very real impact on each of our lives, every single day. At a micro-level, as a former searcher and CEO myself, I know what the journey is actually like. Indeed, in my opinion, nobody knows what it’s like to be an entrepreneur or CEO unless you’ve been one. Personally, and professionally, we face both challenges and opportunities that few others can relate to. Though many understand the rewards of company leadership – like compensation, decision making authority, and independence – few understand the sometimes-arduous journey that’s required to get (and stay) there. As both a CEO and Entrepreneur myself, I have had many successes and (many more) failures, each of which has imparted upon me lessons that can’t be learned in any textbook or classroom. When I raised my own search fund in 2012, I was blessed to have an incredible group of investors. Over the past 12 years, I’ve seen first-hand how thoughtful and helpful investors have improved both my professional and personal lives. Now that I am an investor myself, I couldn’t be more excited to play this role for the next generation of search fund entrepreneurs. Latest From The Blog Leverage: Doing More With Less Listen to this Blog Post “Give me a lever long enough, and a place to stand, and I will move the earth.”- Archimedes “Leverage” is one of those concepts that tends to be interpreted as being more complex than it… December 19, 2024 December 19, 2024 Five Ideas That Every CEO Should Know Listen to this Blog Post What follows are five unrelated thoughts on how to lead and grow a healthy and vibrant company. None of them are long enough to justify a stand-alone blog post, but all of them are important… October 24, 2024 November 18, 2024 17 Lessons on the Psychology of Being a Searcher and CEO Listen to this Blog Post A funny thing happened to me during my ~10 years as a searcher and CEO: Though I had an endless number of commercial problems and opportunities that required my attention at any given time, it… July 18, 2024 July 18, 2024 Latest From The Podcast How to Avoid Common Stumbling Blocks in an M&A Process: with Raam Jani My Guest This week I was thrilled to welcome Raam Jani to the podcast, who is one of the most experienced lawyers in the Search Fund ecosystem, and within the small business M&A ecosystem more broadly. Raam is currently a… February 12, 2025 February 12, 2025 How to Get Your Exit Proceeds (Mostly) Tax Free My Guests This week, we explore two separate mechanisms that may allow acquisition entrepreneurs and their investors to receive their exit proceeds largely free of tax. Relative to how powerful these programs can be, both are not fully understood within… January 30, 2025 January 30, 2025 Dr. Daniel Crosby on How our Psychology Impacts our Spending, Investing and Risk Taking Decisions My Guest This week I was thrilled to welcome Dr. Daniel Crosby to the podcast. Dr. Crosby is a behavioural finance expert, the Chief Behavioral Officer at Orion Advisor Solutions, a Psychologist, and a New York Times best-selling author. He… January 16, 2025 January 16, 2025 Steve Divitkos is the Founder of Mineola Search Partners, a firm that invests in Search Funds, the entrepreneurs who run them, and the companies that they acquire. Prior to Mineola, Steve was the CEO of Microdea, a document management and workflow automation software company serving the transportation and logistics industry. Steve acquired the business from its original founders in 2014, and successfully sold the company to a strategic acquirer in 2020 after having served as its CEO for approximately seven years. During Steve’s tenure as CEO, Microdea’s equity value quadrupled, providing his investors with a 20% compounded annual return on their original investment. In his first 5 years as CEO, Steve doubled company revenue, achieving a ~15% compound annual growth rate, leading to Microdea being named as one of Canada’s fastest growing businesses for four consecutive years between 2014 – 2017. Since that point, he led the company’s transformation towards a subscription revenue model, growing revenue from recurring sources from ~40% of total revenue in 2014 to ~80% in 2020. He helped grow the company’s customer base to include 80% of Canada’s largest trucking companies, and one third of North America’s largest logistics companies. Under his leadership Microdea was ranked as one of Canada’s best places to work for 4 consecutive years between 2017 – 2020, when the company was named as the 46 th best place to work in Canada for all companies with fewer than 100 employees. Upon his departure from the company in 2020, Steve had a 100% CEO approval rating on glassdoor.com. Prior to his time at Microdea, Steve served as the Founder and Managing Principal of RedLeaf Management Partners, a private equity firm focused on acquiring small to medium sized private Canadian businesses. Prior to that, Steve worked in both Private Equity and Private Debt at the Canada Pension Plan Investment Board (CPPIB), the $456B independent investment management organization charged with investing the assets of Canada’s national pension fund, supporting over 20 million working Canadians. Steve received his MBA from Harvard Business School, and his BBA from Wilfrid Laurier University, where he graduated with distinction. Steve lives with his wife and two daughters in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website