You Don’t Have an Engineering Problem, You Have a Product Management Problem Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact You Don’t Have an Engineering Problem, You Have a Product Management Problem Posted by sdivitkos July 4, 2024 July 4, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business (Software Specific) Tags: compensation structure , customers , hiring , incentives , product management , SaaS , software Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Email My Guest Rich Mironov is one of North America’s preeminent Product Management thought leaders. He has spent 40 years in the software industry in numerous capacities, and currently acts as a Coach, Consultant, and Interim Executive for CEOs and Heads of Product across Canada and the United States, advising them on a diverse range of issues spanning product, marketing, engineering, and sales. Rich has led Product Management at six start-ups, and has now consulted for more than 170 technology companies of all sizes, including (among others) Yahoo!, Wealthfront, WhiteHat Security, Wind River, Euclid Analytics, Pushpay and Strategyzer. He is the author of “ Product Bytes “, a hugely popular and long-running blog on software, start-ups, product strategies, Silicon Valley, and the inner life of product managers. Rich is also the author of the book, “ The Art of Product Management ”. Rich has a BS (Physics) from Yale, and an MBA from Stanford University. Play The Episode Listen in Your Browser : You Don't Have an Engineering Problem, You Have a Product Management Problem – In The Trenches Listen on Other Platforms : Apple | Google | Spotify | Breaker | Pocket Casts | RadioPublic Specific Questions and When They’re Asked Introduction Can you describe “ The 4 Laws of Software Economics ”, the speech and blog post that has become so popular and widely read within the Product Management ecosystem? Prioritization of Products, Features & Functions How would you advise a CEO where a large sales opportunity is contingent on a new feature being added to the product, but that feature isn’t on the roadmap? Is there a way to better align the respective incentives of the Sales and Product Management groups, which regularly seem to be at odds? What are some best practices that Product teams everywhere should start implementing into their feature/function prioritization process? Should internal stakeholders “vote” on features/functions to be prioritized? Hiring a Head of Product Management What should CEOs look for when hiring their Product Management leader, and what should they ask in the interview? How do you weigh industry experience vs. general Product Management experience, assuming that it’s hard/rare to find somebody who has both? How involved should a Head of Product be in the day-to-day of Product Management (gathering requirements, writing user stories, etc.)? Product Management 101 How involved should a CEO be in Product Management? Why? How long into the future should a roadmap go out? Why? What are some key questions that CEOs should ask when contemplating a “buy” vs. “build” vs. “partner” decision on a new feature, function or product? How do you diagnose problems when ship dates/commitments are missed when Engineering often blames Product, and Product often blames Engineering? Conclusion If you could scream one thing from the proverbial mountaintops, and every SaaS CEO would hear and fully digest your message, what would you say? Links to All Resources Discussed Conference: The Business of Software Blog Post: The 4 Laws of Software Economics ( Law 1 , Law 2 , Law 3 , Law 4 ) Rich Mironov’s website: Mironov.com Download a Written Transcript of Our Conversation Access a text-based version of our discussion to highlight, copy or take notes by clicking on the button below: Download Written Transcript Thanks to Our Sponsors This episode is brought to you by Oberle Risk Strategies , the leading insurance brokerage and insurance diligence provider for the search fund community. The company is led by August Felker (himself a 2-time successful searcher), and has been trusted by search investors, lenders, searchers and CEOs for over a decade now. Their due diligence offering (which is 100% free of charge) will assess the pros and cons of your target company’s insurance program, including any potential coverage gaps, the pro-forma insurance pricing, and the structural changes needed for closing. At or shortly after closing, they then execute on all of those findings on your behalf. Oberle has serviced over 900 customers across a decade of operation, including countless searchers and CEOs within the ETA community. Oberle Risk Strategies This episode is brought to you by The Profit Line . The Profit Line is a boutique finance and accounting firm that provides a wide range of accounting services to small and medium businesses generating anywhere between $5M to $50M in revenue. On a fractional, outsourced basis, they do day-to-day bookkeeping, bank reconciliations, month-end accruals, tax compliance, and financial statement preparation, among countless other things. I was a customer of theirs for 7 consecutive years while running my own company, and am speaking as a happy customer. Book a call with Founder and CEO, Fern Gordon (Ferngordon@theprofitline.com) or visit their LinkedIn page to learn how they might be able to help you exactly as they helped me. The Profit Line Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Email Like this: Like Loading... Discover more from Subscribe to get the latest posts sent to your email. Type your email… Subscribe Posted by sdivitkos July 4, 2024 July 4, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business (Software Specific) Tags: compensation structure , customers , hiring , incentives , product management , SaaS , software Post navigation Previous Post Previous post: Evaluating The Most Common Forms of Debt Used to Finance Small Business Acquisitions Next Post Next post: 17 Lessons on the Psychology of Being a Searcher and CEO Leave a Reply Cancel reply Powered by WordPress.com . Discover more from Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website %d