working with a partner Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: working with a partner From $7M to $50M via 14 Acquisitions: A Consolidation Success Story With Jay Davis & Jason Pananos My Guests After graduating from business school in 2008, Jay Davis & Jason Pananos acquired Vector Disease Control, a company that they grew from ~$7M to ~$50M in revenue in 7 years through successfully executing on 14 bolt-on acquisitions. They were able to grow the business by a 43% compounded annual growth rate before selling Continue reading “From $7M to $50M via 14 Acquisitions: A Consolidation Success Story With Jay Davis & Jason Pananos” Posted by sdivitkos June 6, 2024 June 6, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , debt , financing , growth , incentives , M&A , time management , valuation , working with a partner Leave a comment on From $7M to $50M via 14 Acquisitions: A Consolidation Success Story With Jay Davis & Jason Pananos Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback: Educators, Mentors, and Leaders Within the SMB Community My Guests Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback are both professors at the Harvard Business School, and co-teach two wildly popular courses called The Financial Management of Smaller Firms and Entrepreneurship through Acquisition, both of which focus on how to acquire, finance and operate your own smaller firm. In 2017 they also co-published the widely read Continue reading “Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback: Educators, Mentors, and Leaders Within the SMB Community” Posted by sdivitkos February 1, 2024 February 1, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , incentives , M&A , profitability , SaaS , software , valuation , working with a partner Leave a comment on Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback: Educators, Mentors, and Leaders Within the SMB Community Kent Weaver: Building, Working With, and Learning from your Board of Directors My Guest Today, I was thrilled to be joined by Kent Weaver. Early in his career, Kent was an acquisition entrepreneur, having acquired Sacramento-based Progressive Home Care. Subsequent to the acquisition, Kent ran the company for approximately 9 years before a successful exit. He has been investing in small and medium-sized businesses ever since. Kent Continue reading “Kent Weaver: Building, Working With, and Learning from your Board of Directors” Posted by sdivitkos March 29, 2023 June 18, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: management team , spouses and partners , working with a partner Leave a comment on Kent Weaver: Building, Working With, and Learning from your Board of Directors Everything You’ve Ever Wanted to Know About Working with a Partner, with Dr. Noam Wasserman, Author of The Founder’s Dilemmas My Guest My guest today is Noam Wasserman, recognized as one of the world’s foremost experts in how to form and maintain high performing partnerships in entrepreneurial contexts. Noam is currently the Dean of the Sy Syms School of Business at Yeshiva University in New York City. Prior to this, Noam was a professor at Continue reading “Everything You’ve Ever Wanted to Know About Working with a Partner, with Dr. Noam Wasserman, Author of The Founder’s Dilemmas” Posted by sdivitkos March 2, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: management team , spouses and partners , working with a partner Leave a comment on Everything You’ve Ever Wanted to Know About Working with a Partner, with Dr. Noam Wasserman, Author of The Founder’s Dilemmas Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website