Podcast- Buying a Business Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Category Archives: Podcast- Buying a Business How to Avoid Common Stumbling Blocks in an M&A Process: with Raam Jani My Guest This week I was thrilled to welcome Raam Jani to the podcast, who is one of the most experienced lawyers in the Search Fund ecosystem, and within the small business M&A ecosystem more broadly. Raam is currently a partner at Baker Hostetler, where he works on a variety of mandates, advising private equity Continue reading “How to Avoid Common Stumbling Blocks in an M&A Process: with Raam Jani” Posted by sdivitkos February 12, 2025 February 12, 2025 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , negotiations , selling a business , valuation Leave a comment on How to Avoid Common Stumbling Blocks in an M&A Process: with Raam Jani How to Get Your Exit Proceeds (Mostly) Tax Free My Guests This week, we explore two separate mechanisms that may allow acquisition entrepreneurs and their investors to receive their exit proceeds largely free of tax. Relative to how powerful these programs can be, both are not fully understood within the Search Fund community, especially among new and prospective searchers. In the first half of Continue reading “How to Get Your Exit Proceeds (Mostly) Tax Free” Posted by sdivitkos January 30, 2025 January 30, 2025 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , LOIs , M&A , negotiations , selling a business , tax , valuation Leave a comment on How to Get Your Exit Proceeds (Mostly) Tax Free An Investing Masterclass with Brent Beshore My Guest Back by popular demand, for his second tour of duty on the podcast, is Brent Beshore. Brent is the Founder and CEO of Permanent Equity, a private investment firm that invests in Founder-owned small to medium sized businesses. They are a (very) long-term investor that looks to hold portfolio companies indefinitely, often without Continue reading “An Investing Masterclass with Brent Beshore” Posted by sdivitkos November 7, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , growth , incentives , M&A , M&A advisor , management team , selling a business , valuation Leave a comment on An Investing Masterclass with Brent Beshore In Conversation with 3 Founders Who Sold Their Companies to Search Funds My Guests Properly managing the relationship with the outgoing seller is likely to be among your most important tasks within your first 6 months as the new CEO. I say this because a non-functional (or worse, a toxic) relationship between the incoming and outgoing owners has the potential to damage a company more than customers Continue reading “In Conversation with 3 Founders Who Sold Their Companies to Search Funds” Posted by sdivitkos October 10, 2024 October 10, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , LOIs , M&A , negotiations , SaaS , selling a business , software , valuation Leave a comment on In Conversation with 3 Founders Who Sold Their Companies to Search Funds From $7M to $50M via 14 Acquisitions: A Consolidation Success Story With Jay Davis & Jason Pananos My Guests After graduating from business school in 2008, Jay Davis & Jason Pananos acquired Vector Disease Control, a company that they grew from ~$7M to ~$50M in revenue in 7 years through successfully executing on 14 bolt-on acquisitions. They were able to grow the business by a 43% compounded annual growth rate before selling Continue reading “From $7M to $50M via 14 Acquisitions: A Consolidation Success Story With Jay Davis & Jason Pananos” Posted by sdivitkos June 6, 2024 June 6, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , debt , financing , growth , incentives , M&A , time management , valuation , working with a partner Leave a comment on From $7M to $50M via 14 Acquisitions: A Consolidation Success Story With Jay Davis & Jason Pananos Why You May Be Ignoring Brokered Deals at Your Peril My Guest My guest today is Ryan Farkas, a Partner, Managing Director and the Practice Leader in M&A and Capital Markets in BDO’s Central Canada region. Ryan has successfully closed countless sell-side advisory transactions in various industries spanning manufacturing, consumer discretionary, construction, engineering, automotive and information technology. Ryan has also worked on several large performance Continue reading “Why You May Be Ignoring Brokered Deals at Your Peril” Posted by sdivitkos May 23, 2024 May 23, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , LOIs , M&A , M&A advisor , negotiations , selling a business , valuation Leave a comment on Why You May Be Ignoring Brokered Deals at Your Peril The Constellation Software Playbook for Acquiring and Growing Software Companies My Guest Constellation Software is one of the world’s most admired, well-followed, and well-respected software acquirors. Since their founding in 1995, they have acquired over 500 individual software companies, and have grown to achieve $8.4B in revenue and a $77B market capitalization. They have achieved these staggering metrics through their exclusive focus on the lower Continue reading “The Constellation Software Playbook for Acquiring and Growing Software Companies” Posted by sdivitkos April 11, 2024 April 11, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , growth , holding companies , M&A , pricing , product management , profitability , SaaS , selling a business , software , technical debt , valuation Leave a comment on The Constellation Software Playbook for Acquiring and Growing Software Companies Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback: Educators, Mentors, and Leaders Within the SMB Community My Guests Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback are both professors at the Harvard Business School, and co-teach two wildly popular courses called The Financial Management of Smaller Firms and Entrepreneurship through Acquisition, both of which focus on how to acquire, finance and operate your own smaller firm. In 2017 they also co-published the widely read Continue reading “Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback: Educators, Mentors, and Leaders Within the SMB Community” Posted by sdivitkos February 1, 2024 February 1, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , incentives , M&A , profitability , SaaS , software , valuation , working with a partner Leave a comment on Royce Yudkoff & Rick Ruback: Educators, Mentors, and Leaders Within the SMB Community Jeff Stevens & A.J. Wasserstein on The Future of Entrepreneurship Through Acquisition My Guests A.J. Wasserstein is the Eugene F. Williams, Jr. Lecturer in the Practice of Management at the Yale School of Management. His research, writing, and teaching concentrates on search funds, entrepreneurship, programmatic acquisitions, and small businesses. In addition to his role as an educator, A.J. is also a private investor in lower middle-market businesses. Continue reading “Jeff Stevens & A.J. Wasserstein on The Future of Entrepreneurship Through Acquisition” Posted by sdivitkos January 18, 2024 January 18, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , deal terms , financing , incentives , M&A , profitability , SaaS , software , valuation Leave a comment on Jeff Stevens & A.J. Wasserstein on The Future of Entrepreneurship Through Acquisition What I’d Change if I Could Re-Do the First 90 Days of My Search: 3 Searcher Case Studies My Guests Today’s I speak with 3 searchers, each of whom are at different stages of their respective search journeys. As I have done in the past, I will again be asking these guests only a single question. That is: “Knowing what you know now, if you could go back and re-do the first 90 Continue reading “What I’d Change if I Could Re-Do the First 90 Days of My Search: 3 Searcher Case Studies” Posted by sdivitkos December 7, 2023 December 7, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Buying a Business Tags: buying a business , focus , goal setting , LOIs , M&A , time management Leave a comment on What I’d Change if I Could Re-Do the First 90 Days of My Search: 3 Searcher Case Studies Posts pagination 1 2 Older posts Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website