Building and Managing a World Class Product Management Discipline Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Building and Managing a World Class Product Management Discipline Posted by sdivitkos August 19, 2021 May 16, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business (Software Specific) Tags: compensation structure , customers , hiring , incentives , product management , SaaS , software Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Email My Guest Rich Mironov is one of North America’s preeminent Product Management thought leaders. He has spent 40 years in the software industry in numerous capacities, and currently acts as a Coach, Consultant, and Interim Executive for CEOs and Heads of Product across Canada and the United States, advising them on a diverse range of issues spanning product, marketing, engineering, and sales. Rich has led Product Management at six start-ups, and has now consulted for more than 170 technology companies of all sizes, including (among others) Yahoo!, Wealthfront, WhiteHat Security, Wind River, Euclid Analytics, Pushpay and Strategyzer. He is the author of “ Product Bytes “, a hugely popular and long-running blog on software, start-ups, product strategies, Silicon Valley, and the inner life of product managers. Rich is also the author of the book, “ The Art of Product Management ”. Rich has a BS (Physics) from Yale, and an MBA from Stanford University. Play The Episode Listen in Your Browser : Building and Managing a World Class Product Management Discipline – In The Trenches Listen on Other Platforms : Apple | Google | Spotify | Breaker | Pocket Casts | RadioPublic Specific Questions and When They’re Asked Introduction (3:10) Can you describe “ The 4 Laws of Software Economics ”, the speech and blog post that has become so popular and widely read within the Product Management ecosystem? Prioritization of Products, Features & Functions (8:10) How would you advise a CEO where a large sales opportunity is contingent on a new feature being added to the product, but that feature isn’t on the roadmap? (13:20) Is there a way to better align the respective incentives of the Sales and Product Management groups, which regularly seem to be at odds? (18:20) What are some best practices that Product teams everywhere should start implementing into their feature/function prioritization process? (24:00) Should internal stakeholders “vote” on features/functions to be prioritized? Hiring a Head of Product Management (28:45) What should CEOs look for when hiring their Product Management leader, and what should they ask in the interview? (34:55) How do you weigh industry experience vs. general Product Management experience, assuming that it’s hard/rare to find somebody who has both? (37:20) How involved should a Head of Product be in the day-to-day of Product Management (gathering requirements, writing user stories, etc.)? Product Management 101 (41:30) How involved should a CEO be in Product Management? Why? (46:05) How long into the future should a roadmap go out? Why? (50:40) What are some key questions that CEOs should ask when contemplating a “buy” vs. “build” vs. “partner” decision on a new feature, function or product? (57:10) How do you diagnose problems when ship dates/commitments are missed when Engineering often blames Product, and Product often blames Engineering? Conclusion (1:00:35) If you could scream one thing from the proverbial mountaintops, and every SMB CEO would hear and fully digest your message, what would you say? Links to All Resources Discussed Conference: The Business of Software Blog Post: The 4 Laws of Software Economics ( Law 1 , Law 2 , Law 3 , Law 4 ) Rich Mironov’s website: Mironov.com Download a Written Transcript of Our Conversation Access a text-based version of our discussion to highlight, copy or take notes by clicking on the button below: Download Written Transcript Subscribe and Never Miss an Episode Subscribe wherever you enjoy podcasts: Apple Google Spotify Breaker Pocket Casts RadioPublic RSS Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Email Like this: Like Loading... Discover more from Subscribe to get the latest posts sent to your email. Type your email… Subscribe Posted by sdivitkos August 19, 2021 May 16, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business (Software Specific) Tags: compensation structure , customers , hiring , incentives , product management , SaaS , software Post navigation Previous Post Previous post: Busting the Biggest Myth About Selling Your Business Next Post Next post: Why Your Company Needs a Set of Core Values (or Why Yours May Not be Having an Impact) 2 thoughts on “ Building and Managing a World Class Product Management Discipline ” Pingback: Considerations Unique to Acquiring a Software Company (Product) Pingback: The Biggest Temptation of a Software CEO Leave a Reply Cancel reply Powered by WordPress.com . Discover more from Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website %d