Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance Posted by sdivitkos April 27, 2023 April 27, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , depression , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Email My Guest This week, I was thrilled to be joined by Andy Johns . The bulk of Andy’s career has been spent in the start-up and technology ecosystems, with growth and product-oriented leadership roles at Facebook, Twitter, and Quora, among others. Following his time at these three companies, Andy became VP of Growth, VP of Product, and eventually President at Wealthfront , an automated investment platform that currently boasts $27 billion AUM across 470,000 accounts. Outside of his various operating roles, Andy has also been an Entrepreneur-in-Residence at Greylock Partners, an Advisor at Unusual Ventures, and an Investor and Advisor across various start-up and technology companies. Recently, Andy underwent a significant pivot in his life and career, and now spends his time helping others heal from emotional pain, transform themselves, and discover their life purpose. He is the Founder of clues.life , an online collection of wisdom, information, stories, and research on mental health, personal transformation, and the pursuit of meaning and purpose. He is also the author of a very popular substack , where he writes about the mental health struggles often faced by high achievers like himself. Listen in Your Browser Mental Health for High Achievers: Ambition, Anxiety, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance – In The Trenches Listen on Other Platforms : Apple | Google | Spotify | Breaker | Pocket Casts | RadioPublic Questions Asked Introduction Please share your story with us, and what led you to what you’re doing today When you experienced burnout, how did you know that it evolved beyond day-to-day exhaustion and became something that warranted formal treatment? Ambition In the past, you’ve said that “I used to believe that I was only lovable and valuable as a human being so long as I was achieving. ” How did you come to this realization, and how did you “un-do” decades of conditioning that told you this? When do we interpret ambition and and achievement-orientation as things that are helpful, and when do we recognize them as potentially harmful? Anxiety Sometimes anxiety is helpful and constructive, but at other times it can be unhelpful or counterproductive. At any given anxious moment, how does one recognize which type of anxiety they might be feeling? What signs might people look for to determine if they’re experiencing a “normal” or “acceptable” level of anxiety, versus a level that would require more meaningful treatment? What is the best way for somebody to go about the process of finding and selecting a therapist? Perfectionism In the past you’ve said that “ perfectionism is fear in disguise” . What does that mean to you, and why do you believe it to be true? Is perfectionism a bad thing? Or is it yet another example of any given virtue also coming with an associated cost? Conclusion What are some of the more common struggles shared with you specifically by entrepreneurs and CEOs? To what extent are our struggles similar to those of other people, and to what extent are they different ? Is there anything that has been left unsaid? Anything that you want to share or communicate with our listeners that we haven’t covered today? Download a Written Transcript of Our Conversation Access a text-based version of our discussion to highlight, copy or take notes by clicking on the button below Access Written Transcript Resources Discussed Eckhart Tolle: The Power of Now Christopher Palmer: Brain Energy Thanks to our Sponsors This episode is brought to you by Symphony, a company that partners with software businesses across the entire software development life cycle, including technical due diligence, team augmentation, outsourced development, technical consulting, and more. Symphony not only performs technical due diligence engagements for search funds, Private Equity firms, and strategic acquirers, but they also partner with those buyers on an ongoing basis on all things product (outsourced development, team augmentation, new product prototyping, UI refreshes, QA professionalization, and so on). Symphony is offering a full 15% off of any of their services for readers & listeners of In the Trenches. Just go to the Contact form on their website and tell them that you’re a listener of the podcast. Symphony This episode is brought to you by Avidbank. Avidbank is one of the most experienced search fund lenders in North America, having funded over 40 separate transactions since 2014, for a total of over $300M. They are deeply familiar with the search fund model, and understand the nuances of the fundraising process, dealing with sellers, communicating with your equity investors, LOI reviews, and everything else in between. Reach out to Anthony Rodriguez (arodriguez@avidbank.com) or Conor Tidgwell (ctidgwell@avidbank.com) to learn more. Avidbank Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Email Like this: Like Loading... Discover more from Subscribe to get the latest posts sent to your email. Type your email… Subscribe Posted by sdivitkos April 27, 2023 April 27, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , depression , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care Post navigation Previous Post Previous post: The 2023 SaaS CEO Survey Next Post Next post: The Merits, Risks, and Possible Unintended Consequences of Earn-Outs Leave a Reply Cancel reply Powered by WordPress.com . Discover more from Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website %d