perfectionism Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: perfectionism The Entrepreneur and the Spousal Relationship: Part 2 My Guest Today I’m joined by Dr. Jennifer Musselman, a globally-recognized Marriage and Family Therapist and Executive Coach for high-performing executives and entrepreneurs. Dr. Musselman’s clinical work focuses on the interplay of work, life, self-identity and marriage, including the common stressors that impact performance and relationship satisfaction for entrepreneurs and other business leaders. Dr. Musselman Continue reading “The Entrepreneur and the Spousal Relationship: Part 2” Posted by sdivitkos August 29, 2024 August 29, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: communication , mental health , perfectionism , self care , spouses and partners Leave a comment on The Entrepreneur and the Spousal Relationship: Part 2 Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance My Guest This week, I was thrilled to be joined by Andy Johns. The bulk of Andy’s career has been spent in the start-up and technology ecosystems, with growth and product-oriented leadership roles at Facebook, Twitter, and Quora, among others. Following his time at these three companies, Andy became VP of Growth, VP of Product, Continue reading “Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance” Posted by sdivitkos April 27, 2023 April 27, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , depression , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care Leave a comment on Mental Health for High Achievers: Anxiety, Ambition, Perfectionism, and Balancing Striving vs. Self-Acceptance Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation My Guest My guest today is Carin-Isabel Knoop, Executive Director of the Harvard Business School Case Research & Writing Group. Carin has spent decades writing cases on managers and leaders all over the world across a wide array of functions and industries. In 2019, alongside co-author John Quelch, Carin published Compassionate Management of Mental Health Continue reading “Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation” Posted by sdivitkos May 26, 2022 August 7, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , culture , depression , HR , imposter syndrome , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care , spouses and partners , stoicism Leave a comment on Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO My Guest Dr. Eliana Cohen is an entrepreneur and Clinical Psychologist who runs her own practice, integrating performance psychology, strategy, emotional intelligence, and knowledge of neuroplasticity and the brain to serve her various clients. She has worked with countless entrepreneurs, business owners, and CEOs in her practice, and is passionate about discussing the psychological realities Continue reading “Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO” Posted by sdivitkos July 22, 2021 July 26, 2021 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , imposter syndrome , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care , time management Leave a comment on Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website