Mike Zani, CEO of The Predictive Index: Hiring, Personality Profiling Tools, Working with a Partner, and Other Lessons from 20 Years as a CEO Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Mike Zani, CEO of The Predictive Index: Hiring, Personality Profiling Tools, Working with a Partner, and Other Lessons from 20 Years as a CEO Posted by sdivitkos January 5, 2023 July 27, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: buying a business , culture , growth , hiring , HR , M&A , software , spouses and partners Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Email My Guest s My guest today is Mike Zani , CEO of The Predictive Index . The Predictive Index serves more than 9,000 clients across 142 countries, helping businesses optimize their hiring and team composition decisions through a combination of behavioral science, software, and professional consulting from the world’s top workplace behavior specialists. Mike has been CEO of The Predictive Index for approximately 8 years, after having purchased the business from its original founders. Prior to leading The Predictive Index, Mike successfully purchased, operated, and sold two other companies in the employee wellness and manufacturing spaces. In addition to his experience as a CEO, Mike is also a best-selling author, having published The Science of Dream Teams , a Wall Street Journal Best Seller, in 2021. Prior to commencing his business career, Mike was the coach for the United States Olympic sailing team,  and was selected as the Coach of the Year in 1996 by the United States Olympic Committee. Mike received an MBA from Harvard Business School, and a BS from Brown University in 1993. Play The Episode Listen in Your Browser : Mike Zani, CEO of The Predictive Index: Hiring, Personality Profiling Tools, Working with a Partner, and Other Lessons from 20 Years as a CEO – In The Trenches Listen on Other Platforms : Apple | Google | Spotify | Breaker | Pocket Casts | RadioPublic Questions Asked Career Arc and Selling His First Business Please walk us through the chronology of your career After your first exit, how did you make the decision to become a CEO again? After you sold your first company, you stayed on to help with the integration process. What was most difficult or surprising about this period of your career? How should exiting CEOs think about the length of transition periods and what appears to be a positive correlation with exit proceeds? When you purchased Predictive Index it was largely a service business, and it’s now largely a software company. What were the most challenging or surprising aspects of navigating the company through this transition? How did you think about when to begin executing on such fundamental changes within a newly acquired business? Personality Profiling Tools How well do these tools translate into “blue collar”, “old economy” types of businesses? How useful are these types of tools when making hiring decisions for roles that are largely performed individually, not as part of a team? Based on your own Predictive Index results, what within your profile is suggestive of your success as an entrepreneur and CEO? If an acquisition entrepreneur approached you to invest in them, what would you look for in their personality profile? Are there profiles that are more predictive of success than others? How might we use tools like Predictive Index, if at all, in our personal relationships? Do people’s personality profiles change over time? Lessons Learned as a CEO Explain your “ head, heart, and briefcase ” framework for evaluating talent, and tell us where within that framework do most hiring mistakes tend to take place? What are some of the hiring mistakes that you’ve made recently, and what generalizable lessons did you extract from those mistakes? How do you modify yourself as a leader when communicating with employees with very different personality profiles? How do you maintain your authentic leadership style but modify your style simultaneously? What should leaders do when managing somebody with a personality profile that tends to clash or conflict with their own? If you could buy a business all over again, knowing what you know now, what would you do differently with respect to talent evaluation during the due diligence process? Working with a Partner What have you learned about the merits and risks of pursuing any entrepreneurial endeavor with a partner versus doing so on your own? For prospective entrepreneurs wrestling with the question of whether or not to work with a partner: Are there any introspection exercises, questions, exercises, or frameworks that they should utilize or think through? What are some of the best practices that you’ve used over the years to maintain a healthy and functioning partnership for as long as you have? If you were to evaluate the respective personality profiles of yourself and your partner, what about these profiles might suggest such an enduring, healthy partnership? Conclusion A few years ago, you decided to take your family on a one-year trip to the Caribbean. What prompted that decision, and what did you learn from that experience? What are some of the practices or rituals or tools that you’ve put into place to ensure that your work does not take precedence over your life? Download a Written Transcript of Our Conversation Access a text-based version of our discussion to highlight, copy or take notes by clicking on the button below Access Written Transcript This post is brought to you by Cayne Crossing . Over the past 12 months alone, Cayne Crossing has completed 61 QofE projects on behalf of prospective buyers, with a combined transaction value of $1B+. Cayne Crossing is offering a special discount to readers & listeners of In The Trenches : Just click the button below, and scroll down to the “Contact” form on their homepage. Enter the offer code “ trenches ”, and you will get a full $2,000 off of your QofE engagement with them. Cayne Crossing This post is brought to you by Warren Coughlin , CEO Coach and founder of JumpStart Coaching. Warren focuses exclusively on coaching CEOs running SMBs, and has been doing so for over 20 years. If you’re not happy with the progress that you’ve made within your first three months working with Warren, he will give you your money back. If that doesn’t say confidence, I don’t know what does. Warren is offering $3,000 off of his coaching program for readers and listeners of In The Trenches . Just go to warrencoughlin.com/trenches to learn more. Warren Coughlin Facebook Tweet LinkedIn Email Like this: Like Loading... Discover more from Subscribe to get the latest posts sent to your email. Type your email… Subscribe Posted by sdivitkos January 5, 2023 July 27, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: buying a business , culture , growth , hiring , HR , M&A , software , spouses and partners Post navigation Previous Post Previous post: The Current State of the Debt Capital Markets Next Post Next post: Constructing, Managing, and Working with a Board of Directors Leave a Reply Cancel reply Powered by WordPress.com . Discover more from Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website %d