imposter syndrome Skip to content Menu + × expanded collapsed Home Testimonials FAQs Blog Podcast Portfolio Books Newsroom Contact Tag Archives: imposter syndrome Long Term Holds: With Zac Carman, CEO of ConsumerAffairs for 14+ Years My Guest My guest today is Zac Carman, CEO of ConsumerAffairs.com since 2010, the year in which he acquired the company from its founder, Jim Hood. ConsumerAffairs is a user-review website that helps over 7 million people per month make decisions on big questions like home warranties, debt consolidation and elder care planning. Prior to Continue reading “Long Term Holds: With Zac Carman, CEO of ConsumerAffairs for 14+ Years” Posted by sdivitkos January 1, 2025 January 1, 2025 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: burnout , goal setting , imposter syndrome , liquidity , M&A , selling a business , strategy Leave a comment on Long Term Holds: With Zac Carman, CEO of ConsumerAffairs for 14+ Years Dr. Bill Hudenko: Professor of Psychology at the Dartmouth School of Medicine and a 4x Founder & CEO My Guest Today I was thrilled to be joined by Dr. Bill Hudenko, an Assistant Professor of Clinical Psychology at the Dartmouth School of Medicine. In addition to his experience as a professor and clinician, Dr. Hudenko is also a 4x CEO & Entrepreneur, having founded and sold several companies that have utilized technology to Continue reading “Dr. Bill Hudenko: Professor of Psychology at the Dartmouth School of Medicine and a 4x Founder & CEO” Posted by sdivitkos August 15, 2024 August 15, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , depression , imposter syndrome , mental health , self care , selling a business , transparency Leave a comment on Dr. Bill Hudenko: Professor of Psychology at the Dartmouth School of Medicine and a 4x Founder & CEO 17 Lessons on the Psychology of Being a Searcher and CEO Listen to this Blog Post A funny thing happened to me during my ~10 years as a searcher and CEO: Though I had an endless number of commercial problems and opportunities that required my attention at any given time, it was often the personal considerations that kept me up at night: Indeed, I rarely lost Continue reading “17 Lessons on the Psychology of Being a Searcher and CEO” Posted by sdivitkos July 18, 2024 July 18, 2024 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , imposter syndrome , mental health , self care , spouses and partners Leave a comment on 17 Lessons on the Psychology of Being a Searcher and CEO When Search Funds Don’t Go As Planned (Part 1): 3 Searcher Case Studies My Guests If one were to attend a randomly selected group of Search Fund conferences, they’d be forgiven for thinking that every search fund is a smashing success. When I was both a searcher and a CEO, I often left these types of events with a certain sense of insecurity and self-doubt, as everybody seemed Continue reading “When Search Funds Don’t Go As Planned (Part 1): 3 Searcher Case Studies” Posted by sdivitkos June 22, 2023 June 22, 2023 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: buying a business , CEO time and emotion , debt , imposter syndrome , M&A , mental health , selling a business 1 Comment on When Search Funds Don’t Go As Planned (Part 1): 3 Searcher Case Studies Evaluating the Correlation Between Hours Worked and Success Achieved Listen to this Post Though there are countless books, blogs, podcasts, and social media accounts that serve as thoughtful and informative resources for current and prospective entrepreneurs, unfortunately there appears to be an equal number of resources that demonstrate seemingly no limit to the fundamentally bad advice that they’re willing to impart upon others. Early Continue reading “Evaluating the Correlation Between Hours Worked and Success Achieved” Posted by sdivitkos February 16, 2023 August 16, 2023 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , imposter syndrome , mental health , self care , time , time management 1 Comment on Evaluating the Correlation Between Hours Worked and Success Achieved Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation My Guest My guest today is Carin-Isabel Knoop, Executive Director of the Harvard Business School Case Research & Writing Group. Carin has spent decades writing cases on managers and leaders all over the world across a wide array of functions and industries. In 2019, alongside co-author John Quelch, Carin published Compassionate Management of Mental Health Continue reading “Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation” Posted by sdivitkos May 26, 2022 August 7, 2022 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , CEO time and emotion , culture , depression , HR , imposter syndrome , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care , spouses and partners , stoicism Leave a comment on Employee Burnout and The Great Resignation Should You Become an Entrepreneur? Listen to This Blog Post Within your first-degree network alone, I suspect you know a large number of people who, at one time or another, have expressed a desire to pursue an entrepreneurial career path. Yet I also suspect that, of those people, only a small percentage of them have actually elected to take the Continue reading “Should You Become an Entrepreneur?” Posted by sdivitkos May 12, 2022 May 12, 2022 Posted in Managing Yourself Tags: core values , focus , imposter syndrome , self care Leave a comment on Should You Become an Entrepreneur? “Like Changing Tires on a Moving Car”: The Unseen Realities of Managing Rapid Growth My Guest Anthemos Georgiades (or Anth, for short), is the founder and CEO of Zumper, an apartment rental platform based out of San Francisco that he founded in his second year at Harvard Business School in 2012. If anybody knows anything about running a rapidly growing company, it’s Anth. Consider this: Despite being founded less Continue reading ““Like Changing Tires on a Moving Car”: The Unseen Realities of Managing Rapid Growth” Posted by sdivitkos November 11, 2021 December 5, 2024 Posted in Podcast- Managing Your Business Tags: buying a business , CEO time and emotion , core values , growth , hiring , imposter syndrome , M&A , management team , self care Leave a comment on “Like Changing Tires on a Moving Car”: The Unseen Realities of Managing Rapid Growth Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO My Guest Dr. Eliana Cohen is an entrepreneur and Clinical Psychologist who runs her own practice, integrating performance psychology, strategy, emotional intelligence, and knowledge of neuroplasticity and the brain to serve her various clients. She has worked with countless entrepreneurs, business owners, and CEOs in her practice, and is passionate about discussing the psychological realities Continue reading “Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO” Posted by sdivitkos July 22, 2021 July 26, 2021 Posted in Podcast- Managing Yourself Tags: anxiety , burnout , imposter syndrome , meditation , mental health , perfectionism , self care , time management Leave a comment on Understanding and Managing The Psychological Toll of Being an Entrepreneur or CEO Powered by WordPress.com . Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website